Ammonia
Market Outlook
March 2015
Ammonia Market
Outlook
March 2015
Chancery House, 53-64 Chancery Lane, London WC2A 1QS
Tel: +44 (0) 20 7903 2132 Fax: +44 (0) 20 7833 4973 Website: www.crugroup.com
This report is supplied on a private and confidential basis to the customer. Its contents must not be disclosed to any other company, organisation or individual, nor be photocopied or otherwise reproduced in whole or in part, without the prior written permission of CRU International.
This report is delivered on the understanding that CRU International’s liability is limited to the provision of the professional services outlined in the contract for this report. Although every effort has been made to undertake this work with care and diligence, CRU International cannot guarantee the accuracy of any forecasts or assumptions or that the proposed investment will be successful. If the client uses our work in any information Memorandum or similar document for the purpose of raising funds, CRU International accepts no liability to third parties however arising and without limitation.
©CRU International Ltd, 2015. All rights reserved.
Confidential
Nitrogen Team
Alistair Wallace
Team Leader | Nitrogen
t +44 20 7903 2081
e alistair.wallace@crugroup.com
Fertilizers Team
Contents
Confidential
Contents continued
Confidential
List of Tables
Confidential
List of Tables continued
Confidential
List of Diagrams
Confidential
List of Diagrams continued
Confidential
Available online @ MyCRU
Available on MyCRU (http://mycru.crugroup.com):  The full report in PDF format
 Report Charts in PowerPoint
 All tables and FULL appendices in Excel format
Should you have any problems with your access please contact Customer Services on +44 207 903 2146 or customer.services@crugroup.com
Unless otherwise noted in the text, the market statistics in this Report are drawn from CRU’s fertilizer teams’ database for fertilizers, minerals and chemicals. This database is assembled by the expert staff of CRU’s fertilizer team, using information from a wide range of sources, including the International Fertilizer Industry Association (IFA), various regional and national agencies, and suppliers of international trade statistics, including Global Trade Information Services Inc. (GTIS), as well as individual producers and exporters of these products.
Confidential
Nitrogen Cost Data Service
THE MOST COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT OF GLOBAL NITROGEN COSTS
A subscription to CRU’s Nitrogen Cost Data Service will allow you to understand the key factors driving global production costs.
Determine how to break up your sales to achieve the best potential netbacks
Producers
Accurately estimate the premiums your products should receive based on the convenience of your location and the quality of
your products
Benchmark your
operations against
the competition
Establish which
markets are the most
advantageous
to target
Investors
How complex and risky is the project? (Our detailed cost sheets will allow you to identify areas of weakness/eﬃciency)
Which projects will give you the best returns?
Discover which investments are worth looking into
Traders
Seek secure
long term sources
of supply
An essential decision making tool if you are:
■Manufacturing fertilizer
■Taking a stake in a nitrogen project
■Considering entering the nitrogen market
■Expanding or upgrading your current facility
To pre-order your copy today, please email julie.cunningham@crugroup.com or call +44 20 7903 2146
Executive Summary
Ammonia Market Outlook Highlights: March 2015
Notable developments in the Q1 2015 Ammonia Market Outlook
•We have lowered our price forecast to around $400/t in 2015 and dropped it below $390/t in 2016 to reflect a more bearish outlook for key ammonia fundamentals. Prices of oil, contract gas, corn, DAP and urea are all falling as a response to deflationary energy markets and weak fertilizer demand growth and oversupply.
•A tighter ammonia market in 2015 is expected to provide shelter from the full force of collapsing fundamentals as production curtailments are expected to persist in Egypt, Ukraine and Trinidad. However, new merchant ammonia capacity coming on stream over forecast will add liquidity to the market and allow a closer alignment between ammonia and nitrogen values set by urea.
•Since the previous edition of this report we have added Yara/BASF 750,000t/y standalone, merchant ammonia plant to the forecast in 2019.
•Ammonia demand is expected to remain strong over the next five years, driven predominately by gains in urea, ammonium nitrate (including TAN) and DAP from 2017. However, a weak outlook for grain prices could limit growth.
A bear market ahead as ammonia loses fight with gravity
3.5
3.0DAP
2.5Urea
1.5Corn
1.0Oil
0.0 -0.5 -1.0 -1.5 -2.0
Data: CRU, IMF, EIA
•However, CRU does not expect the ammonia market to be as exposed to deflationary energy markets as the urea market.
•The global supply/demand balance continues to look healthy and is not forecast to fall below 80% over our forecast period. An operating rate at this level should allow producers at the market’s margins to remain profitable.
•Ammonia also has a different cost profile to the urea market, and short-run marginal costs will be set by export orientated producers in Ukraine and Eastern on oil-linked gas contracts.
3.30
3.10
2.90
2.70
2.50
2.30
2.10
1.90
1.70
1.50 
Data: CRU, USDA, CME
•All of the major fundamentals we track as indicators of ammonia price trend have undergone a substantial devaluation over the last six months, which will weigh heavily on ammonia values.
•This has forced us to reappraise our cyclical price forecasts and implement a significant downwards revision in 2015 and 2016.
•However, our view of the market for 2018 and 2019 remains little changed. And as can be seen in the chart opposite we are forecasting a substantial rebound in pricing fundamentals by 2017.
Data: CRU, IFA
• Brazil and Argentina are both in the midst of a record soyabean harvest and futures quotations have fallen sharply since December. This reflects a forecast 40% rise on global inventory levels. Meanwhile, corn futures prices have remained steady since finding a floor in September, with lower prices seemingly triggering extra demand.
• As soyabean prices move lower, and corn holds its ground, the soybean:corn price ratio has moved considerably, with the Soy Nov15 contract:Corn Dec 15 contract currently at 2.3:1, compared to 2.4:1 at the beginning of the year. With the spring planting period approaching, this should help to boost corn 2015 plantings and nitrogen demand.
Agricultural demand is forecast to support operating rates...
Global ammonia demand is forecast to reach 176.9 million tonnes in 2015, up from the 173.1 million estimated for 2014. With global grain and oilseed prices reaching a period of consolidation following consecutive ample grain and oilseed harvest, fertilizer demand over the coming years is likely to be pressured. This will particularly be the case for cost-conscious agricultural producers such as the United States.
There has been much industry conjecture in the USA over 2015 crop areas as we approach the spring planting season. Lower corn prices seen throughout 2014 are thought to have favoured soyabeans over corn for planned planting. CRU sees corn harvested area falling 1.9%, to 33.0 million hectares, with soyabean area expected to be 33.7 million hectares, similar to 2014. Lower corn area will pressure demand for ammonia, particularly direct application ammonia, a common source of nitrogen in the Midwestern states.
Since the beginning of 2015 the soyabean:corn price ratio has declined to levels supporting corn planting. While the ratio was supportive for more soyabean plantings in the key November-December 2014 period (when crop choice decisions are made), the steep declines in soyabean prices in 2015 has seen the ratio slip below a possible ‘crop switch point’. This may spur some extra corn plantings and ammonia demand, particularly in the Midwest where an early start to fieldwork is expected due to recent warm and dry conditions. It must be noted that the area available to crop switching in the Midwest is limited to around 3% of total arable area.
Phosphate fertilizers are the most sensitive to low agricultural prices and are often the first to be cut when farmers look to reduce input costs. If crop prices continue to move lower over 2015 and 2016 but fertilizer prices remain steady, both demand and production of ammoniated phosphates may be throttled. The lag period of such throttling must be considered. Declines in demand will cause a build up of inventories, which will later trigger cuts in production and therefore ammonia demand.
...and the floor price will support prices in 2015 as oil lags gas prices
Producers in Ukraine, as well as other major producing regions in Central and East European, rely on supplies of imported Russian gas as the feedstock for their ammonia production process. These gas supplies are sold on long-term take-or-pay contracts, indexed to the price of Brent crude oil on what are termed Groningen-type contracts. These contracts are based on replacement value theory: in the past oil was consumed in Europe for power-generation and heating purposes and was substitutable for gas. As Russian gas had/has very low production costs, it was priced on an oil basis to account for its substitutability for oil in the European energy consumption mix.
In the table we have used our calculated oil-indexed gas price for Ukraine (nine-month lag to our forecast of Brent crude) and modelled the weighted-average cost of ammonia exports at Yuzhnyy port. The costs are taken from CRU’s Nitrogen Fertilizer Cost Report and are on an annualised basis. This means it is an average breakeven price for the year and a producer may well, for a period, sell at a price lower than its annual breakeven price in the expectation that prices may recover in the future. There are also costs such as maintenance and payroll taxes that do not require in-year payment and may be postponed.
Ukraine: Export Costs, 2014-19 ($/t)
A new wave of Russian nitrogen investment is quietly growing...
In July 2013, Eurochem announced its intention to build a world scale ammonia and urea plant in Louisiana, citing a wish to establish production closer to its sizable US customer base, and capitalize on readily available energy, labour, infrastructure and logistics. However, global geopolitics has changed since then: both oil and the Russian rouble have lost almost half their value and sanctions have been placed on Russia over its involvement in Ukraine.
This has made Russian foreign investment less attractive for two reasons. Firstly, domestic production is cheaper for companies with international sales. This has certainly been the case for Eurochem which posted an EBITDA margin in Q4 2014 of 37%. The company estimates that with a USD/RUB close to 65 (as opposed to the 2013 average of 30), total operating cost savings in 2015 will be close to $500 million. Secondly, access to international capital markets has become more difficult. While Eurochem is technically now a Swiss company, the majority of its production assets (and large parts of its business) are based in Russia, and it will therefore be equally expensive for the company to service internationally (dollar) denominated interest on debt. Adding to these two factors are less favourable fundamentals in the USA where escalating capital costs and rapidly expanding capacity additions have been weakening the rational for further investment.
As the result of these factors we expect to see Russian nitrogen producers predominantly focus their investment efforts at home over the next few years, and not in other countries. At present there are four greenfield projects and one brownfield included in our committed forecast, with four more under consideration.
New Russian Capacity
ICT Group – Baltic Urea plant (2018)
Ammonia capacity: 0.4 million t/y
Eurochem Kingsiepp (2015)
ammonia capacity: 0.9 million t/y
Acron Novgorod II (2015)
ammonia capacity: 0.7 million t/y
Shchekinoazot (2017)
ammonia capacity: 0.1 million t/y
Ammonii Mendeleevsk (2016)
ammonia capacity: 0.7 million t/y
EuroChem -Nevinnomyssk II (2018)
ammonia capacity: 0.9 million t/y
Socar Sumgait (2017)
ammonia capacity: 0.7 million t/y
Shchekinoazot(2017)
ammonia capacity: 0.7 million t/y
Minudobrenia Rossosh (n/a)
Ammonia capacity: 0.3 million t/y
Rostec/Global steel holdings– Sakhna (n/a) Ammonia capacity: 2 million t/y
JSC National Chemical Group – Nahodka (n/a) Ammonia capacity: n/a
...While Yara and BASF commit to Freeport ammonia plant
The rush to build nitrogen fertilizer plants in the USA has added more than 5 million t/y of ammonia since 2009 but rapid escalation of construction costs has dampened activity in the last couple of years. In the chart below we have estimated how the rate of return on a 750,000 t/y ammonia plant in the US Gulf Coast depends on the initial capex and the price premium of its feedstock over Henry Hub. A plant like Dyno Nobel’s Waggaman, which cost $850 million to build and will buy its gas from Henry Hub, yields a 12.2% annual return – 2.4% higher than if it started being built today at a cost of $1 billion. Because of this, companies are seeking ways to reduce capital costs, even if it means paying a premium for their raw materials.
Capex ($m)
The latest innovative solution comes from Yara and BASF, which are building a 750,000t/y ammonia plant at BASF’s site in Freeport, Texas. Praxair has agreed a long-term contract to supply hydrogen, nitrogen and CO2 from its Texas City complex to be used as raw materials, saving an estimated $400 million by removing the requirement for a costly steam/methane reformer to produce hydrogen. We estimate an NPV of just $54 million for a conventional ammonia plant but $479 million if it were to cost $600 million instead of $1 billion. So in principle, Yara/BASF ought to accept to pay a premium over Henry Hub natural gas prices for its raw materials providing the NPV of the project remains above $54m. Given our stated assumptions, we believe that Yara/BASF could pay up to 49% more for its raw materials and still create a higher NPV than by building a standalone gas-based ammonia plant.
In practice, Yara/BASF will expect to negotiate a premium well below this maximum. However, Praxair is investing more than $400 million to add hydrogen and nitrogen capacity and extend its Gulf Coast pipeline network to Freeport. Notwithstanding the strategic benefits of connecting to the industrial zone in Freeport, Praxair will no doubt expect Yara/BASF to contribute to a return on this capital investment as well as covering its own costs of production. Furthermore, Praxair will recognize that Yara/BASF will be making a large capital saving that is wholly contingent on its arrangement with Praxair and hence expect a share of this saving through the pricing of its raw material supply contract. So although the bargaining zone for the two parties extends all the way from Praxair’s cost of production to a 49% premium over the cost of purchasing the equivalent quantities of natural gas from Henry Hub, we expect that the supply contract will be settled at a premium of perhaps 15-30%.
CRU has revised down Ammonia benchmarks in 2015 and 2016
We have downgraded our near-term ammonia forecast by around $75/t in response to a rapidly weakening outlook for ammonia market fundamentals. The urea price has collapsed at Black Sea and Middle Eastern FOB benchmarks as Chinese coal-based exports continue to oversupply the Pacific and Indian basins, while improved Ukrainian and North African output have increased availability East of Suez. Urea prices are not forecast to improve until 2017, in line with a recovery in global energy markets.
Although not as severe as in the urea market, oversupply is also weighing on DAP prices and reducing the operating rates at ammoniated phosphate plants. However, production is forecast to grow over the forecast period and will help maintain ammonia operating rates above 80% as urea rates decline. The corn market looks to have bottomed out and small gains are expected over the forecast. So while corn and DAP markets should support ammonia buying, the deflationary pressure from urea and energy markets will almost certainly outweigh any gains until they begin their recovery.
FOB Black Sea Ammonia Forecast ($/t, nominal)
550
500
450
400
350
Data: CRU
Annual price forecast, $/tonne, nominal
Conditions of Sale
This report has been supplied under a contract signed by an executive of your company which commits your company to hold the report confidential and to refrain from providing it or communicating its contents in whole or in part to any third party without the prior written consent of CRU International Ltd. The only exceptions are subsidiaries 100% owned by your company.
Please note that this obligation is binding upon you, whether or not you have been informed of the existence of this contract, and in violating its terms you put your company at financial risk.
•No contents of this report may be communicated to any consulting organisation hired by your company without the prior written authorisation of CRU International Ltd. CRU reserves the right to refuse such authorisation or to negotiate an appropriate fee and appropriate confidentiality undertakings. Please remember that CRU International and its associates offer experience and capability in strategy and business consulting in your industry.
•No contents of this report may be communicated to any of your bankers or your financial advisers without the prior written authorisation of CRU International Ltd. Such authorisation will normally involve the negotiation of an appropriate fee.
•No contents of this report may be communicated to any joint venture company, partner, less than 100% owned subsidiary or less than wholly-owning parent company without the prior written consent of CRU International Ltd. Such authorisation will normally involve the negotiation of an appropriate fee.
If you are unsure if your organisation has obtained this report by purchase you must satisfy yourself on this point or else return the report immediately to CRU International together with any copies or notes from the report. Failure to do so will put your organisation at financial risk.
Chapter 1 - Demand
1.1 Global Ammonia demand overview
In 2014 ammonia demand is estimated to have reached 173.1 million product tonnes. CRU forecast this to increase to 176.9 million tonnes in 2015 and expand to 193.1 million tonnes by 2019. Urea production was responsible for 54% of total consumption in 2014 and is expected to remain the main component of demand over the medium term.
Table 1.1: Regional total ammonia demand
Diagram 1.1: Global ammonia demand components


0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Ammonia requirement (million product tonnes )
Other ammonia consumption includes NPKs, direct application and other nitrogenous fertilizers
Data: CRU
China is the dominant consumer of ammonia, responsible for 36% of total demand in 2014. This rate was higher than usual, reflecting a sharp increase in urea production in response to unprecedented export demand. Consumption of ammonia for technical uses is seen rising sharply in the medium term, offsetting projected declines in urea production. The United States remain the second highest user, followed by India, Russia and Indonesia. Growth in consumption over the medium term will be concentrated in Africa, Middle East, South-East Asia and South America. The Middle East and Africa will be driven by expansions in nitrogen facilities, with countries looking to monetise ample gas availabilities. Increased production of Caprolactam in China will support consumption in East Asia.
Table 1.2: Demand by end use for major consumers (million tonnes)
Table 1.2: Demand by end use for major consumers (million tonnes)
– Concluded.
1.2 Agricultural Markets overview
Agricultural markets are important for ammonia demand despite ammonia not being directly applied to crops (except the United States). It is a key ingredient in nitrogen, phosphate and compound fertilizers. Consumption of these fertilizers is related to agricultural production and prices. The following section of this chapter outlines key market developments.
1.2.1 Recent agricultural developments
World grain production (wheat, corn, rice and other coarse grains) is estimated to have reached a record
2.5billion tonnes in 2014/15 (July/June), fractionally higher than the 2013/14 season. Global wheat output is seen at 725.0 million tonnes, up 1% compared to 2013 and a fresh high, with harvested area elevated 0.3% y-o-y. Outstanding yields were recorded in many countries, particularly within the EU and CIS. Output was lower in North America, with Canada returning to normal yields and a lower area following a near perfect 2013, while drought in the Southern Plains hampered winter wheat productivity in United States. A dry spring in south-eastern Australia forced a downgrade in production estimates, following an excellent start to the growing season. Output in Argentina grew 19% on good growing conditions and increased planted area.
2014/15 corn production is estimated at 991.3 million tonnes, a new record and up slightly from last year’s crop, despite a 1.6% decline in global harvested area. Record yields were reported in the United States and the EU, however, dry conditions in China’s northern growing area reduced output there. In Brazil, harvest of the first crop is progressing at a slower-than-average pace due planting delays caused by dryness. Safrinha (second) crop planting is now close to completion, with area forecast to be lower compared to last year (see section 1.3). Good rainfall and growing conditions in Argentina has been positive for crop prospects, with harvest in its early stages.
Soyabean output is set to reach a record 315.1 million tonnes in 2014/15, an 11% increase from the previous year, with United States production exceeding 100 million tonnes for the first time. Harvesting is underway in Brazil, with record production of 92 million tonnes expected, while favourable growing conditions in Argentina should see output expand to 57 million tonnes. Global harvested area is forecast to grow 4.2% y-o-y to 117.1 million hectares, underpinned by a 9.4% y-o-y increase in the United States.
Rice production is estimated to remain mostly unchanged from 2013. Minor gains in China, Indonesia, Bangladesh and Vietnam were not enough to offset a reduction in India’s output, reflecting a smaller summer (kharif) crop after delayed monsoon rains. Total output was seen at 475.5 million tonnes, down a modest 0.3% y-o-y, with harvested area increasing marginally to 162.4 million hectares.
Sugar output in 2014/15 is set for its second straight decline, falling 2% from the previous season to
172.5million tonnes. Brazil, the largest producer, is set to experience a 5% y-o-y reduction, to 35.8 million tonnes due to drought and continued low prices. Lower production in China, Thailand, Pakistan and Russia is seen offsetting gains in India, the EU and the USA. Global sugar inventories are considered to be in a ‘glut’, with prices at five year lows.
Consecutive years of strong grain and oilseed production have bolstered stocks to more comfortable levels, following tightness through 2012/13 which resulted in higher prices. These higher prices triggered increased planting and this, combined with favourable weather conditions, has resulted in significantly higher output and inventory levels.
Diagram 1.2: Global grain and oilseed stocks:use ratio and price indices
Data: CRU, USDA, IGC
Price index (Jan 2006 = 100)
High prices triggered extra plantings. Good
400growing conditions has seen production rise and inventories grow, pressuring the indices
350lower.
150
100
50
0
With high levels of stocks, grain and oilseed quotations have fallen to their lowest since 2010. Although wheat prices found some support towards the end of 2014, they have slid significantly lower in 2015. Corn prices have remained steady over the past six months, but sharply down from levels seen over the past three years. We believe that prices have now found their floor which has triggered extra demand from end users, particularly within the livestock industry. Soyabean prices have seen a steady decline as Brazil output moves towards a fresh record and global stockpiles rise almost 40% year-on-year. Rice quotations also remain under pressure, despite a drop in stocks which have been steadily building over the past ten years. Abundant global supplies of grains and oilseeds should cap any major upward price movements in the near future, particularly in H1 of 2015.
Fertilizer prices have also seen steady declines since 2014, with strong export competition pressuring values. This has helped to ease the pressure on farmers as they face lower grain prices. While there were no significant fertilizer application cuts in 2014, CRU expect some light reductions in 2015, with phosphate fertilizers particularly sensitive the low crop prices. This could have a longer term impact on the ammonia demand for the production of DAP and MAP.
1.2.2 Short and medium term considerations
As the northern hemisphere comes out of winter and crops (mostly winter wheat) break their dormancy, a better judgement of crop prospects can be made. Crops in good condition are expected to consume more nitrogen, as they will have a greater yield potential, whereas crops in a poor condition are expected to see reductions in application rates. The table and diagram below give a brief assessment of winter wheat crop conditions in key growing areas, along with forecast harvested areas. In key urea consuming countries, conditions are generally considered as good, supporting demand for 2015.
Table 1.3: Global wheat crop conditions
Diagram 1.3: Wheat conditions & forecast harvest area (% y-y change)

18.5 (-2%)
Europe 
6.2 (-2%) 23.4 (-1%)
13.5 (+6%)
23.8 (-1%)
Data: CRU, IGC, FAO, USDA
As the northern hemisphere spring planting season approaches, the market can clearly focus on crop areas and prices and the respective impacts on fertilizer demand. Crop prices suffered significant losses in 2014, and have continued to move lower at the beginning of 2015. While this is not supportive for agricultural production, values still sit above long term levels. The diagram below shows current market sentiment. Traders have moved toward a net short position across the major agricultural commodities, suggesting further price falls in the near term. The table overleaf collates the current developments in key markets and our view on price directions for 2015.
Diagram 1.4: Net futures trading positions on US agricultural markets
Data: CRU, CFTC
more traders expecting futures price to increase
more traders expecting futures price to decrease
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
Table 1.4: Crop Prices and Potential Direction
Mixed expectations of a new deficit phase.
1)2014 Estimates for 27 major consuming countries. a) Based on CRU trade weighted export prices. b) Kuala Lumpur palm oil futures nearby contract. c) Sugar NYBOT futures nearby contract.
Lower crop prices are expected to impact planted area as farmers look save money on inputs where possible. Wheat harvested area is forecast to decline in the major producing countries. It should be noted that the EU-28 are the largest collective grower and exporter of wheat, with area there expected to grow 1% in 2015. Total wheat area in the Top 27 fertilizer consuming countries is seen falling for the first time since 2012. Corn area is seen moving lower in the US where growers are particularly price sensitive. Brazil area is also forecast lower due to a fall in safrinha plantings.
Despite high stocks and low prices, soyabean area is forecast to continue growing. Area in the US is tentatively projected to remain at 2014 levels, while Brazil plantings should continue to expand. Rice area is forecast fractionally higher, underpinned by improved plantings in India following last year’s monsoon
delays. Elsewhere, rice area is expected remain on trend, seen lower in China and slightly higher in other major Asian producers. These lower planted areas are expected to pressure total fertilizer demand. Although CRU expects a slight rebound in corn and wheat values in H2 of 2015, the consensus among other global forecasting agencies is for all prices to continue their downward trend. Longer term outlooks show that wheat and rice prices are expected to remain steady, while soyabean and corn values are projected to move higher, reflecting increased animal feed demand. Higher corn prices and stable wheat and rice levels will be supportive for fertilizer demand over the longer term. The recovery in soyabean prices later in the medium term will pressure nitrogen fertilizer demand, as soyabeans compete for land area with heavy nitrogen consuming crops like corn and spring wheat. However this will support phosphate demand.
Diagram 1.5: 2015 forecast harvested areas, top 5 growing countries
Data: CRU
The outlook for lower prices in the near term will pressure fertilizer demand, however this will be somewhat offset by softer fertilizer prices. Demand for both nitrogen and phosphate based fertilizers is expected to grow in 2015, underpinned by consumption in Asia. More developed markets, like North America and Europe may be pressured by lower crop prices, while growth in Brazil is set to continue, but at a lower rate than seen in previous years. Increased agricultural production and demand over the medium term will support fertilizer demand to 2019.
Nutrient Forecasting Methodology
CRU has developed a nutrient demand model, forecasting consumption at a country level over the next five years. Agricultural production is a function of food demand; therefore the first stage is to forecast global food demand, which is a function of population and GDP growth. Population growth determines total caloric requirements, while rising income affects food consumption (i.e. which food group will make up those calories).
The second and third stages are to forecast crop area and application rates by country. On a global basis, twenty seven countries (major consumers) account for approximately 90% of nutrient demand. By comparison, the remaining one hundred and fifty countries in our model (minor consumers), account for just 10% of global nutrient consumption. As such we have used two different approaches to calculate crop area and application rates in these two groups.
Concept of nutrient demand model
Growth in harvested area by crop in major consuming countries is based on our food demand projections. This is calculated using an historical series from the FAO, recent and current data from various sources, and forecasts from the CRU crop model. The forecast is then disaggregated by country and by crop, factoring in population, food intake, and average yields. All of these elements enable us to produce a robust forecast of production growth rates on a country and crop level, and thus a forecast of crop area calculated by country and by crop.
To calculate nutrient application rates by crop, we estimate the base year using IFA/FAO and FAPRI data or national sources. This is back-casted for all crops using country-level application rates, unless national sources are available, such as USDA data. The forecast is then based on recent trends and analyst judgement, and manual adjustments at country-level are made to reflect current apparent nutrient demand for N, P2O5 and K2O. A much simpler approach is used when calculating crop area and
application rates in minor consuming countries. In this case, we extrapolate recent trends to aggregate crop area by country and application rate by country. Thus, nutrient demand is calculated as a function of these.
Crop area forecast in major consuming countries
1.3 NH3 Demand from Ammoniated Phosphates
The most important developments in ammoniated phosphates supply through 2014 occurred in Africa, where widespread social unrest resulted in the curtailment of both phosphoric acid and concentrated phosphate fertilizer. This was most notable in Tunisia, where relentless strike action within GCT’s mining division (CPG) and logistics provider (Tunisian Company for the Transport of Mining Products in Gafsa), severely reduced rock supply. Phosphoric acid production and concentrated phosphate fertilizer production in Tunisia through 2014 fell to an estimated 731,000 tonnes P2O5 and 511,000 tonnes P2O5 respectively; a 21% and 29% reduction when compared to 2013. This resulted in a 40% decline in ammonia demand for DAP and MAP production, to 107,000 tonnes.
Additionally, North America saw reductions in production in 2014. In Q4, MissPhos idled phosphoric acid and DAP production, shortly after filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, with no clear intention of resuming operations. Also in Q4, Mosaic curtailed production in a successful attempt to pressure their suppliers of ammonia to reduce prices. Total United States demand for ammonia in MAP and DAP production fell 6% year-on-year, to 1.9 million tonnes.
Despite the production troubles outlined above and the fact that global capacity for concentrated phosphate fertilizer fell by 2% year-on-year, production increased by 3% to 31.1 million tonnes P2O5.
This increase in production was attributed to greater production in Asia, resulting from the successful commissioning of new plants there.
Global production of MAP increased to 12.1 million tonnes in 2014, up 1.8% from 2013 volumes. Production in CIS, North America and Africa declined but was outweighed by sharp gains in China. 2015 output is forecast to increase slightly, to 12.2 million tonnes, with demand for ammonia seen at 3.8 million tonnes. This modest growth rate is projected to continue over the medium term, with 2019 volumes seen at 12.4 million tonnes of MAP, with an ammonia requirement of 3.8 million tonnes.
DAP production experienced a sharper level of growth in 2014, moving 4.2% higher from 2013 volumes to 16.4 million tonnes P2O5. Output in China again underpinned growth, increasing 9.2% to 7.9 million tonnes. Volumes from Africa also increased but at a comparatively modest level, while the United States suffered steady losses. 2015 levels of DAP are forecast to remain steady, at 16.6 million tonnes, with an ammonia requirement of 8.3 million tonnes. This should accelerate over the medium term, to 18.6 million tonnes DAP by 2019 with an ammonia demand of 9.3 million tonnes.
Other regional developments expected to drive ammonia demand from ammoniated phosphate markets include:
•Downstream phosphate production capacity in Morocco is expected to increase significantly over the forecast period, with MAP capacity increasing from 2.1 million tonnes in 2014 to 3.5 million tonnes in 2019. DAP capacity will also increase over the outlook period, reaching 4.3 million tonnes by 2019, adding 1.3 million tonnes in 5 years. This translates into a total ammonia requirement of 1.1 million tonnes in 2019, a steep increase from the 0.8 million tonnes required for 2014. The shortfall in ammonia will be supplied by PotashCorp from Trinidad & Tobago. For this purpose, new ammonia storage capacity will be build at Jorf Lasfar, allowing enough storage of ammonia to sustain 45 days of ammoniated phosphate production at capacity.
•In Saudi Arabia, Ma’aden is expected to continue the expansion of current phosphate fertilizer capacity over the forecast period. MAP capacity will increase from current 0.5 million tonnes to
0.8million tonnes in 2019. In terms of DAP, capacity will increase sharply, from 3.3 million tonnes in 2014 to 5.8 million in 2019. This will translate into a doubling of the current ammonia requirement, to 1.2 million tonnes in 2019.
•Output in Brazil is also forecast to rise, with MAP capacity rising from 1.3 million tonnes in 2014, to 2.1 million in 2019, underpinned by strong domestic fertilizer demand as the agricultural industry continues its rapid growth. This will lead to an ammonium requirement of
0.3million tonnes by 2019, up from the current level of 0.2 million.
•The outlook for the ammonia demand from the phosphate sector in the United States is that of a decrease as US producers reduce MAP and DAP production in favour of NP+S over the forecast period, although capacity utilisation is expected to increase significantly following recent consolidations. Ammonia requirements will be reduced by more than 0.1 million tonnes, to 1.8 million tonnes by 2019. Ammonia is primarily imported from Trinidad & Tobago and the US state of Louisiana.
Diagram 1.7: Ammoniated phosphates production forecast
Production (million tonnes P2O5)
MAP
12
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Data: CRU
Phosphate fertilizers are the most sensitive to low agricultural prices and are often the first to be cut when farmers look to reduce input costs. If crop prices continue to move lower over 2015 and 2016 but fertilizer prices remain steady, both demand and production of ammoniated phosphates may be throttled. However, the lag period of such throttling must be considered. Declines in demand will cause a build up of inventories, which will later trigger cuts in production and therefore ammonia demand. Global ammonia demand from MAP and DAP production in 2014 is estimated at 12.0 million tonnes. This is tentatively forecast to rise to 12.1 million tonnes in 2015 and expand to 13.1 million tonnes over the medium term. This will mainly be driven by expansions in DAP capacity, which is the phosphate fertilizer which is expected to grow the most and has the highest nitrogen content.
Table 1.5: Ammonia required in DAP and MAP (‘000 tonnes)
1.4 Anhydrous Ammonia (direct application) demand
The direct application of ammonia (anhydrous ammonia) in the US is a major source of crop nitrogen, with approximately 3.3 million tonnes (N based) applied each year. Its high concentration (82% N) means it is often the cheapest form of nitrogen available, although it must be stored under high pressure, requires specialised/expensive infrastructure and can only be applied when weather and soil conditions suit. Almost all global consumption of anhydrous ammonia occurs in the US.
The winter conditions have again been severely cold; however this is not thought to have had any major impact on crop or field conditions. Indeed, hard soil caused by freezing conditions in January allowed farmers in some states to progress with fertilizer applications prior to spring sowing. Conditions throughout February and March have not been advantageous for fieldwork, but snowfall on the corn-belt should boost soil moisture reserves. Current conditions in the Midwest have been warm and dry which may allow for an early start to fieldwork, encouraging additional ammonia demand.
Harvested areas for the major crops are likely to be lower in 2015, with plantings in marginal growing areas to be cut due to the lower crop price outlook. Wheat area is seen at 18.5 million hectares (18.8 million last year), with both winter and spring wheat areas expected to be lower. Spring wheat plantings will be pressured by low corn prices, as spring wheat is often used as a feed replacement for corn. The strong US dollar has reduced export demand for US wheat and is further expected to pressure prices. Corn harvested area is seen at 33.0 million hectares (33.6 million last year). Plantings in marginal areas are forecast lower; however with soyabean prices falling at a faster rate than corn, area may rise from initial expectations.
As farmers approach the spring planting season, traders and distributors obtain a better understanding of the nitrogen fertilizer mix for the year. Reports suggest a ‘normal’ nitrogen product split year (Urea, Direct application ammonia, UAN (nitrogen solutions)). The diagram below shows the average split in popular nitrogen products in key consumption states from 2010-2012. On average, 3.3 million tonnes of nitrogen are consumed through direct application ammonia. Iowa, Illinois, Nebraska and Kansas are the largest users.
Diagram 1.8: Average nitrogen fertilizer use in the United States
Nitrogen fertilizer use ('000 tonnes N)
Data: CRU, AAPFCO
With corn area forecast lower in 2015 and wheat plantings also set to decline; direct application ammonia demand is seen falling to 4.1 million product tonnes in 2015. Over the medium term, consumption is seen declining at a gradual pace, moving to 3.4 million tonnes, pressured by alternative and cheaper products such as UAN. Furthermore, aging equipment is not expected to be replaced, while expansions in plantings are expected to occur in regions where anhydrous ammonia facilities are not available.
1.5 Technical ammonia demand
1.5.1 NH3 demand from the caprolactam industry
In recent years, the caprolactam (CPL) industry has seen a sustained period of capacity growth. Much of this growth has been driven by increased demand for nylon-6 fibre which is the primary consumer of caprolactam.
The caprolactam industry is divided between facilities integrated with ammonia production and those that are not integrated, requiring merchant supply from domestic and international buyers. In countries where energy is mostly imported, such Japan or South Korea, caprolactam plants are likely to buy merchant ammonia. On the other hand, countries such as Russia and Uzbekistan mostly have integrated ammonia facilities with their caprolactam plants. Historically, the split between integrated and non-integrated facilities has been close to 50:50 and the split is expected to remain over the forecast period despite all new capacity additions expected to occur in China by 2019.
Diagram 1.9: Regional caprolactam capacity, 2014 (‘000 t)
Total production capacity stood at 6.5 million tonnes in 2014, though with the market in oversupply, actual production was lower with global operating rates in the 75 - 80% range. Capacity is expected to continue growing significantly over the forecast, though growth is likely to tail off towards the end of the market as the market becomes increasingly saturated.
The effects of increased capacity in China are also likely to affect countries actively involved in the trade of caprolactam. Increasing levels of domestic production are forecast to displace caprolactam imports into China leading to an annual import decline of 12% over the forecast period. Predictably, increased capacity in China will drive domestic demand for ammonia. By 2019, China is expected to consume 1.0 million tonnes of merchant ammonia for caprolactam production.
1.5.2 Acrylonitrile
As with the caprolactam industry, the building of acrylonitrile plants has grown to satisfy global demand for synthetic fibres and resins. Acrylonitrile is used in the production of acrylic and modacrylic fibres which account for 50% of its global use. Other uses for acrylonitrile and its polymeric derivatives include automotive components and computer appliances. Specialty plastic composites included polyacrylonitrile-based carbon fibres for lightweight applications in aircraft, motor vehicles and engineering applications. Other large consumers of acrylonitrile are the acrylonitrile (polymer), styrene and styrene acrylonitrile polymer industries. These industries account for more than 30% of the acrylonitrile used globally. They are used mainly in the production of chemical resistant industrial hoses, gaskets and seals. Global ammonia demand from the acrylonitrile industry is forecast to remain relatively constant for the majority of the forecast period. By 2019 ammonia demand is expected to reach 2.3 million t/y.
1.5.3 Methyl Methacrylate
Methyl methacrylate or MMA is expected to use approximately 158,000 tonnes of merchant ammonia globally in its manufacturing process in 2014. It is important to note that nitrogen is not consumed in the final product and the merchant ammonia is only used as an intermediary chemical to neutralize the acid conditions that the reaction favours. Ammonium sulphate is produced as a co-product from this reaction.
MMA is used mostly for the formation of acrylic plastics and a small number of specialist applications. In 2019, it is estimated that a 152,300 tonnes of ammonia will be required globally for the production of MMA, or a decrease of 3.8% since 2014 in line with growth of industrial production in developed countries.
1.6 Other Ammonia Consumers
Approximately 283,000 tonnes of ammonia are consumed globally by other minor industries in 2014. CRU has collected these processes together base on the fact that growth from these industries is not large or absolute consumption is relatively small. Included in this category is uranium processing (limited to Canada), emissions scrubbing, Nickel High Pressure Acid Leaching (Ni-PAL) and the ammonium carbonate-gypsum process. Ammonia demand in this category has a very small growth rate because many processes have been superseded by new technologies not requiring ammonia or the process has a niche that exists in a sector not showing large growth.
Ammonia demand from the above industries is forecast to increase to 308,000 t/y by 2019. Most of this new demand is to be driven by the nickel industry that is forecast to add more than 500,000 tonnes of new nickel to the current 1.6 million tonnes already produced. Almost 17% of nickel production is achieved through the Ni-PAL (requiring ammonia) process.
Chapter 2 - Supply
2.1 Outlook for Ammonia Supply
Global capacity of ammonia is expected to equal 236.4 million tonnes in 2019. This is a 0.2 million tonnes upwards revision from our previous forecast and reflects the addition of two new plants to the forecast which slightly outweighs lower than previously expected capacity growth in China. Other key supply side developments in this outlook include:
•We now have 64 projects in our committed forecast. In addition to these projects we are currently tracking 82 speculative plants with a total of 51.7 million tonnes of ammonia capacity. Out of these plants, 21 are located in East Asia, 19 in North America, 11 in South Asia, 7 in Sub- Saharan Africa with the rest spread between CIS, South America and Oceania.
•Since the previous outlook global production has been lowered to reflect a more bearish demand outlook in key ammonia consuming markets. We have lowered our forecasted ammonia demand in urea, ammonium nitrate, and ammoniated phosphate production. As a result global operating rates are now expected to reach 81.7% in 2019, a 0.6% downwards revision since the Q4 2014 version of this report.
•This chapter includes two special focus pieces looking at topical events in the ammonia market. On page 44 we look at the recent gas price increases in Pakistan and the effect on nitrogen producers there. On page 35 we have included a longer piece looking at the investment rational for the newly announced Yara and BASF joint venture ammonia plant in Newport, Texas, USA.
Table 2.1: Changes to ammonia Capacity Since Last Quarter (exc. China*)
* Changes to Chinese forecast covered in East Asia regional section
Diagram 2.1: Ammonia Capacity Outlook, 2013-2019 (million tonnes)*
250.0
200.0
150.0
100.0
50.0
0.0
2013






Total





Diagram 2.2: Forecasted Ammonia Capacity, 2015- 2019
Table 2.2: Global Ammonia Capacity Outlook, 2013-2019 (million tonnes)*
Probable + firm = forecasted ammonia capacity
Supply side forecasts: The Project Gateway Methodology
In order to make its capacity forecasting methodology more transparent and clear, CRU has developed a unified system to assess announced projects in the fertilizer industry. This should not be seen as a revision to the previous methodology, but rather as an attempt to summarize and schematize it; moreover, the same methodology will be applied to all of CRU’s market outlooks with product-specific adaptations, ensuring consistency across our product range.
The Project Gateway System (PGS) is aimed at forming the basis for our capacity forecast up to a five- year horizon. Projects are divided into three groups: Speculative, Probable and Committed:
•Speculative projects are either projects at early development stages, or projects for which information is either not available or contradictory. Hence, they are not included in our base-case capacity forecast.
•Probable projects represent advanced projects that have progressed at least to the feasibility stage, but are still missing some necessary features, such as permitting or financing.
Amongst these projects, CRU identifies those which are likely to be upgraded to the committed category within the next year; the reason for this lies in our estimate for new projects to come on-stream (3-4 years). Committed capacity, summed to “advanced” Probable capacity, will form CRU’s high-case scenario.
With the aim of classifying projects according to the above categories, CRU’s PGS scores each project according to four categories:
•Raw materials and feedstock covering the sources of required production inputs.
•Finance and marketing covering the status of capital raising and agreements for the injection of production into the market, as well as feasibility studies and sustainability simulations;
•Technology and engineering covering the status of design and construction of the project;
•External factors which include the status of compulsory permits (e.g. Environmental Impact Assessments), of logistics (development of infrastructures, or access to existing ones), and social impact (stakeholder engagement, public perception of the project).
Each of these categories is assigned a numerical score, reflecting the status in each according to the matrix provided below. This exercise creates a first indication of the overall advancement of the project itself
The role of the analyst has not been reduced to the mere application of this methodology. Additional factors will play a focal role when providing the overall judgment for each project, including, amongst others:
•Whether the project has received official approval from the Board of Directors of the company;
•Type of project (greenfield vs. brownfield)
•Position of the company in the industry (junior, major or state-owned enterprise);
•Past success history of the company and historical records of comparable projects;
•Economic support of the project’s scope from CRU’s forecasts;
•Availability of publicly available information and media news about the project
Some general precautions need to be taken into account when valuing available information. For example, major companies generally release less project information into the public domain than junior companies, which are trying to raise external financing, while state-owned enterprises release even less. Less strict criteria on demonstrating availability of necessary financing is applied to major companies that are expected to fund projects primarily through free cash flow, particularly in the case of brownfield expansions.
Some general precautions need to be taken into account when valuing available information. For example, major companies generally release less project information into the public domain than junior companies, which are trying to raise external financing, while state-owned enterprises release even less. Less strict criteria on demonstrating availability of necessary financing is applied to major companies that are expected to fund projects primarily through free cash flow, particularly in the case of brownfield expansions.
The Project Gateway System (PGS): Nitrogen expansions
Whenever possible, indirect sources (such as articles in industry media) have been cross-checked and assessed, capitalizing on CRU’s experience and direct contacts in the industry. All of the categorizations are made to the best of CRU’s knowledge, and are regularly updated.
2.2 Regional Ammonia Supply Outlook
2.2.1 East Asia
2.2.1.1 China
Supply Forecast Overview
China’s ammonia production fell year-on-year in 2014. A total of 56.99 million tonnes of ammonia was produced in 2014, down by 1.8% on the 58.1 million tonnes produced in 2013. This was mostly caused by lower urea prices and lower demand in this sector. Despite this, Chinese ammonia capacity growth will remain strong over the forecast, particularly in the first two years. Nine nitrogen projects came on-stream in 2014 with a further 13 projects with (3.9 million t/y ammonia) will come on-stream in 2015. Growth is expected to tail off towards the end of the forecast and between 2017 and 2019, only 0.9 million tonnes of new ammonia capacity is expected to come on stream. In total we expect 7.8 million tonnes of new Chinese ammonia capacity over the forecast.
Annual Regional Production/Capacity, million tonnes product
100
Capacity China
'000 m tonnes
80
60
40
20
0
Medium term outlook, million tonnes product
Chinese capacity additions, 2015
http://mycru.crugroup.comAmmonia Market Outlook
Table 2.3: Changes to Chinese ammonia capacity since last quarter
2014 Output: 57.0 million mt product (-1.8% YoY)
2.2.2 North America
Supply Forecast Overview
We are currently tracking 35 ammonia projects in North America with a total announced capacity of 14.3 million tonnes, but we are only expecting 10 of these to come on stream by 2019. This means that North American ammonia capacity will reach 42.9 million tonnes in 2019 – a 4.6 million tonnes increase on 2014. All of the new capacity in the region will be located in the USA and only three projects are being built as greenfield.
News tracker
Rentech is looking for
strategic alternatives for its ...which might include selling all its nitrogen assets.
nitrogen business...
Annual Regional Production/Capacity, million tonnes product
'000 m tonnes
Medium term outlook, million tonnes product
A new tax incentive bill was passed unanimously in the North Dakota senate in February, allowing tax exemption for the “tangible personal property”, such as building materials and building structure, used to construct or expand fertilizer production facilities in the state. This bodes well for CHS and Northern Plains Nitrogen, which are both looking to build new world scale nitrogen plants in North Dakota, but have been battling with escalating capital expenditure. The new bill is adding to an already extant bill providing tax exemptions for manufacturing equipment. Combined the two bills have the potential to provide significant savings for the two fertilizer projects should they undertake construction. North Dakota is looking to valorise its large Bakken gas endowments by incentivizing the establishment of a value-adding downstream petrochemical industry in the state. In addition to the two proposed nitrogen plants, a $4 billion Polyethylene plant has also been proposed and is in the planning stages. CHS and Northern Plains Nitrogen remain in the speculative part of our capacity tracker as both projects still need to finalise financing and EPC contracts before committing to a final investment decision.
Rentech Nitrogen Partners announced in February that it is evaluating strategic alternatives which could “include a sale of the partnership, a merger with another party, a sale of some or all of the assets of the partnership, or another strategic transaction”. Rentech has two nitrogen facilities in the USA; an ammonia, urea and UAN plant in East Dubuque, Illinois and an ammonia, sulphur and ammonium sulphate plant in Pasadena, Texas. This might be a good time to sell nitrogen assets in the USA as the cost of building is preventing new projects from materializing.
CF is the latest company to bear the burden of rising costs in the USA. The company announced in March that its brownfield expansion at Port Neal will now be $300 million more expensive than its previous estimates. The company reported that extra costs have come as the project has higher costs of labour and a need “to winterize the plant against Iowa’s cold”. The CAPEX revision does not change our forecast and we still expect the project to come on-stream in mid-2016.
While cost inflation is limiting new builds, companies continue to explore different ways of bringing extra tonnages to market without bearing the full cost of a greenfield plant. Yara and BASF recently announced that they will go ahead with a hydrogen off-gas ammonia plant in Freeport, Texas (Covered in detail below), while Agrium is considering restarting its Kenai plant in Alaska. While Agrium has obtained a key air quality permit, natural gas supply (the lack of which closed the plant in 2007) still remains an unknown in the area, and the plant is therefore not included in our forecast. When the plant closed in 2007 it had 1.3 million tonnes of ammonia capacity per year, and a restart would likely see similar volumes come stream.
Yara/BASF Freeport Ammonia Plant
High fertilizer demand and low gas prices resulting from the shale revolution have transformed the USA into the most attractive place in the world to operate a nitrogen plant. The rush to build these plants has added more than 5 million annual tonnes of ammonia since 2009. However, over the past couple of years the introduction of quantitative easing has kept rates to record lows, allowing investors access abundant cheap capital to fund new builds, leading to a boom in the US economy and a steep increase in the demand for construction services and equipment in all industries. This, in turn has had a big impact on the capital building costs for new nitrogen plants in the USA, where construction and EPC companies that have the knowledge to build these sites are making the most of this bullish market. What would have cost eight hundred million dollars a couple of years ago easily costs over a billion dollars today. As a result, the race to build ammonia plants has slowed down significantly with many projects being put on hold. We do not expect these costs to come down anytime soon and as a result, companies are looking for ways to lower their capex.
Effect of reducing capex on a Gulf Coast project's IRR
In the graph above we can see the different Internal Rates of Return that a theoretical 750,000 t/y ammonia plant in the US Gulf Coast would yield depending on the initial capex and price premium of its feedstock relative to our Long Run Henry Hub gas forecast. From the graph we can see that a plant like Dyno Nobel’s Waggaman, which cost $850 million to build and will buy its gas from Henry Hub, will yield a 12.2% annual return, a whole 2.4% higher than if it had started being built today at a cost of $1 billion. This again sheds some light on why so many projects are today being put on hold in the USA. From the graph we can also see how the IRR of a low capex project that will pay a 40% premium above Henry Hub’s price for its feedstock is higher than the IRR of a highly expensive project that will buy its gas from Henry Hub. Because of this, companies are today incentivised to look for solutions to spend less on their project capex, even if it means paying a premium for their raw materials.
The latest innovative solution comes from Yara and BASF, which announced its intention to build a 750,000 tonnes per year ammonia plant at BASF’s site in Freeport, Texas on 19 February 2015. Praxair has agreed a long-term contract to supply hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon dioxide from its Texas City complex to be used as raw materials. Without the requirement of a costly steam/methane reformer to produce hydrogen, the plant will cost significantly less than a conventional ammonia plant that uses natural gas feedstock. CRU estimates that an ammonia plant of a similar scale running on natural gas would have cost at least a billion dollars instead of the $600 million that has been budgeted.
We have run a discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis on the two options to understand how much this capital saving will allow Yara/BASF to pay for its alternative raw materials. The Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) is the average return that Yara or BASF would expect to create value for their shareholders as well as to pay off any debtholders, and returns above the WACC contribute to a positive Net Present Value (NPV), indicating the relative attractiveness of each investment. Below, we show the results of this DCF analysis for a conventional ammonia plant costing $1 billion and for Yara/BASF’s preferred option as a function of the premium paid for raw materials above the Henry Hub gas price. These results are based on a WACC of 9.1% along with cost forecasts generated by CRU’s Nitrogen Cost Model and our price forecasts for ammonia and natural gas over a 25 year asset lifetime.
We estimate an NPV of just $54 million for the conventional ammonia plant but $479 million if it were to cost $600 million instead of $1 billion. In principle, Yara/BASF ought to accept to pay a premium over Henry Hub natural gas prices for its raw materials providing the NPV of the project remains above $54m. If Praxair were to charge them such a premium that the NPV drops below $54m it implies that Yara/BASF would be better off borrowing more money to build a conventional plant for $1 billion.
∆NPV ($m)
500
400
300
200
100
0
0%
-100
How much is too much?
Bargaining Zone
Raw materials premium
over Henry Hub
The chart above shows the difference between the NPVs of each option as a function of the premium charged by Praxair. Given our stated assumptions, we believe that Yara/BASF could pay up to 49% more for its raw materials and still create a higher NPV than by building a standalone gas-based ammonia plant. This figure is CRU’s approximation and the actual maximum premium Yara/BASF would consider paying will depend on their subjective WACC, the plant lifetime and their forecast of prices.
In practice, Yara/BASF will expect to negotiate a premium well below this maximum. Praxair’s bargaining position will be based on its average cost of production (which given that this is partly based on steam- reforming of natural gas is likely to be above the equivalent Henry Hub price) plus the additional value it believes it can extract from Yara/BASF.
Praxair is investing more than $400 million to add hydrogen and nitrogen production capacity and extend its Gulf Coast pipeline network approximately 46 miles to the Yara/BASF plant at Freeport. Notwithstanding the strategic benefits of connecting to the industrial zone in Freeport, Praxair will no doubt expect Yara/BASF to contribute to a return on this capital investments. Furthermore, Praxair will recognize that Yara/BASF will be making a large capital saving that is wholly contingent on Praxair’s supply of syngas and nitrogen and hence expect a share of this saving through the pricing of its raw material supply contract. Yara/BASF will not want to give away all the benefit of choosing this option but must accept that Praxair needs to benefit too. So although the bargaining zone for the two parties extends all the way from Praxair’s cost of production to a 49% premium over the cost of purchasing the equivalent quantities of natural gas from Henry Hub, we expect that the supply contract will be settled at a premium of 15-30%.
2.2.3 CIS
Supply Forecast Overview
Ammonia capacity in the CIS region will increase 4.4 million tonnes as seven new projects come on-stream in the next five years. Of these seven projects, five will be located in Russia, one in Azerbaijan and one in Turkmenistan. In CIS we are currently committing seven out of a total 17 tracked plants. The uncommitted plants in the region tend to be planned for the latter part of the forecast period with very little information available yet. Out of all the tracked projects, 11 are greenfield, 2 revamp and 4 brownfield.
News tracker
Annual Regional Production/Capacity, million tonnes product
'000 m tonnes
Medium term outlook, million tonnes product
Data: CRU
Preparations to start construction at Shchekinoazot’s new ammonia and methanol plant in Tula, just south of Moscow, has started and the plant is included in our forecast for the first time. Haldor Topsoe is the ammonia licensor for the project, while Mitsubishi is delivering the compressors and Kirchner is providing the steam reforming furnaces. Basic design of the plant is now completed and construction work is expected to start imminently. The plant is expected to come on-stream in 2017 with 415 mtpd (~140,000 tonnes per year) of ammonia.
Navoiazot announced in March that Mitsubishi was awarded the construction tender for its planned new plant in Uzbekistan. The new complex will have capacity to produce 660,000 mt/year ammonia and 577,500 mt/year urea and the company has announced a cost of $961.74 million for the project. The project will be financed through a loan from the Fund for Reconstruction and Development of Uzbekistan of $320 million, Navoiazot's own funds and loans from local and foreign banks. The project is the latest project to be announced in Central Asia where governments have increasingly been looking to valorise stranded gas assets. While project logistics are likely to remain expensive, benefits from a low cost of natural gas (likely in the range of $1-2/MMBtu) and a favourable cost of capital (from the Fund for Reconstruction and Development of Uzbekistan), are likely to outweigh the cost. However, the project is not included in the forecast until we hear more news on the plant’s financing and technology progression.
Diagram 2.4: New Russian Capacity
ICT Group – Baltic Urea plant (2018)
Ammonia capacity: 0.4 million t/y
Eurochem Kingsiepp (2017)
ammonia capacity: 0.9 million t/y
Acron Novgorod II (2015)
ammonia capacity: 0.7 million t/y
Shchekinoazot (2017)
ammonia capacity: 0.1 million t/y
Ammonii Mendeleevsk (2016)
ammonia capacity: 0.7 million t/y
EuroChem -Nevinnomyssk II (2018)
ammonia capacity: 0.9 million t/y
Minudobrenia Rossosh (n/a)
Ammonia capacity: 0.3 million t/y
Rostec/Global steel holdings– Sakhna (n/a)
Ammonia capacity: 2 million t/y
JSC National Chemical Group – Nahodka (n/a)
Ammonia capacity: n/a
2.2.4 Africa
Supply Forecast Overview
African ammonia capacity is expected to increase 4.6 million tonnes between 2014 and 2019. This increase will come from five new plants coming on-stream in Algeria, Egypt and Nigeria. In addition to the five plants in the forecast we are also tracking 6 further projects in the region, but it is looking increasingly unlikely that these will start production within the forecast period. African production has been revised down since the previous outlook to reflect difficult operating conditions across the region – especially in Egypt. Most of this change feeds in from a changed urea production forecast.
News tracker
Gas issues in Egypt put halt to ammonia production
Ammonia production is down on all Egyptian plants except EFC. Gas issues also decreases likelihood of MOPCO Damietta starting production in 2015.
Annual Regional Production/Capacity, million tonnes product
'000 m tonnes
Medium term outlook, million tonnes product
Data: CRU
MOPCO has been building a brownfield 1.2 million t/y urea plant at its Damietta site since 2008. The project has been chronically delayed and it now looks like it will suffer further with completion again pushed back from the Q2 2015 starting date the company had hoped for. In its Q4 2014 earnings update Agrium (which owns 21% of the project) stated that there is “risk that work on the Egyptian Misr Fertilizers Production Company S.A.E (MOPCO) nitrogen facility expansion in Egypt may be interrupted again and may not be completed on the timelines currently anticipated or at all”[our emphasis].
2.2.5 South and Central America
Petrobras is currently building two ammonia plants in Brazil – Tres Lagoas which is scheduled for completion in 2016 and Uberaba the year after. Combined these plants will add 1.2 million tonnes of ammonia, though most will be used downstream in urea production. Following the large corruption scandal haunting Petrobras in recent months there has been uncertainty over the likelihood of these plants being finished on time. However, according to local news reports all disputes between the company and subcontractors are now resolved with the company guaranteeing completion of the two projects on schedule. We maintain our completion year for both plants. Once on-stream the plant will supply fertilizer and industrial demand in the region, and product from the plant will primarily be moved by truck.
Supply Forecast Overview
Three plants are forecast to come on stream in C&S; America over the forecast – two in Brazil and one in Bolivia. In Brazil, the Petrobras Tres Legoas plant is a turnkey ammonia/urea plant and will have no merchant ammonia availability. Petrobras is also building an ammonia plant in Uberaba, Minas Gerais and ammonia output from this plant is expected to feed MAP/DAP in the region, taking away some of vales ammonia demand currently imported. The bolivian plant is not expected to have any merchant ammonia, as it is already hard enough logistically to get urea from the plant to the Brazilian Cerrado, let alone ammonia.
News tracker
Annual Regional Production/Capacity, million tonnes product
'000 m tonnes
Medium term outlook, million tonnes product
2.2.6 Middle East
Sabic's joint venture the Ma'aden Phosphate Company (MPC) shut down its ammonia plant March 24 so that unscheduled maintenance could be carried out on its cooling facility. The ammonia unit only restarted a few days before, after a 30-day scheduled maintenance since February 22. The plant maintenance is expected to last for 10 days. In addition to this, Muntajat confirmed that Qafco's Ammonia III, V and VI plants remained shut down undergoing maintenance until the end of March leaving low ammonia inventories for April.
Supply Forecast Overview
Only one new plant is expected to come on stream in the Middle East over the next five years. This is Ma’aden’s Ras Al-Khair plant which will start commercial production in 2017. In addition to this plant we are also tracking plants in Iran, Bahrain and Saudi Arabia. Based on our preliminary export data in 2014, urea exports from Qatar are down 1 million tonnes on the previous year which is feeding through to the 2014 ammonia production number. We are currently investigating the validity of this data.
News tracker
Production outages halt ammonia output at MPC and Qafco
MPC shut its ammonia line twice in the last two months for one scheduled and one unscheduled maintenance turnaround. This coupled with closure of Qafco’s III, V and VI ammonia plants have reduced output in the region this quarter.
Annual Regional Production/Capacity, million tonnes product
'000 m tonnes
Medium term outlook, million tonnes product
Data: CRU
2.2.7 South Asia
The Indian government yet again dodged an opportunity make difficult decisions and tackle the country’s inefficient urea subsidy scheme in March as the new Indian budget was published with no major revisions. As a result CRU maintains our bearish view on new Indian ammonia capacity over the forecast
–despite an announcement from the Indian government that it will be looking to build more coal-fed ammonia/urea plants in coal-rich regions of the country. The only plant currently included in the forecast is the Matix plant in Panagarh which is expected to come on-stream in the end of 2015. The plant is currently experiencing problems with natural gas supply, but expects these issues to be resolved within 2- 3 months.
Supply Forecast Overview
Ammonia capacity growth in South Asia will be limited over the forecast and currently we are only forecasting two plants to start production in the region. However, all ammonia produced at these plants will be consumed in associated urea production, and as such the plants will have no effect on the traded market. There are consistently new plants being announced by the Indian government, both domestic and abroad, but so far we have not seen sufficient development in these projects to allow inclusion in the forecast.
Annual Regional Production/Capacity, million tonnes product
'000 m tonnes
Medium term outlook, million tonnes product
Data: CRU
2.3 Ammonia Production Costs and Feedstock Prices
Henry Hub gas prices have remained below $3.00/MMBtu even as extreme cold weather in parts of the north-eastern US have driven demand to record highs and pushed prices in places like New York and Boston well above $20.00/MMBtu. European gas prices have remained around $8/MMBtu during the last quarter as a warmer than average winter kept demand unseasonably low, with prices falling as low as $6.87/MMBtu in January at the Zeebrugge gas hub. However, the threat of short-term supply disruption caused gas price futures at Western European hubs to spike 2.6% on news announced during late February that Russian gas supplies to Ukraine were below half the agreed volume brokered by a European Union agreement.
CRU Feedstock Price Forecast
US natural gas: Henry Hub
$/MMBtu 14.00
12.00
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
0.00
Data: CRU, EIA
European Natural gas: Hub basis
$/MMBtu 14.00
12.00
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
0.00
Data: CRU, Gaspool
European Natural gas: Russian contract
$/MMBtu
Data: CRU, IMF
Chinese coal: FCA basis
Data: CRU, SX Coal
Benchmark Energy Prices ($/MMBtu)
Data: CRU, IMF, EIA, Gaspool, SX Coal
2.3.1 US gas production is putting prices under pressure
The US rig count has continued to fall in response to low oil and gas prices which could have a knock on effect and limit the level of new gas supply coming on-stream over the next few months. While the natural gas rig count has only fallen 11% to 300 rigs since this time last year, oil rigs have fallen by 26% to 1,056 as low oil prices test the level of US shale operator’s profitability. Lower levels of oil production could limit associated gas production growth. Our current weighted average estimates for North American shale oil producer’s lifting costs are $65/bbl, slightly below our annual 2015 Brent forecast at $60/bbl. Furthermore, a faster than expected draw down in gas inventories over the coming months, which are currently 2.8% above the five year average at around 2,157 Bcf (mostly because of high levels of storage in underground salt caverns), due to a prolonged cold spell could provide some upside risk to our price forecast during the remainder of 2015.
Diagram 2.5: US gas production has been increasing even as monthly gas rig count falls
Data: Baker Hughes, EIA
2.3.2Weak oil market weighs on European gas prices
Waidhaus, the German border benchmark price for gas imported from Russia has been in steady decline over the last six months, currently trading around $9.30/MMBtu, the price has been following the price of Brent oil lower as the global oil markets reacts to oversupply and slowing demand. The import price of gas in Germany is negotiated on long term contracts and indexed directly to oil and/or a basket of alternative fuel prices, typically on a three to six month lag.
Waidhaus is used to determine some European industrial prices in neighbouring countries where these are set as a proportion of contract (Waidhaus) and a proportion of spot based pricing (typically the price at ZeeBrugge where prices are determined by gas-on-gas competition) with other appropriate taxes and duty on top. For example, the industrial gas prices nitrogen producers pay in Poland are closely associated
with the German border price as Poland also import gas from mostly Russia and Germany under a similar formula. Over the next six months we expect Waidhaus to continue to fall as the oil price bottoms out around $50/bbl. This is expected to yield a price at the German border of around $5.90/MMBtu during mid-2015 assuming the oil price does not see any further downwards price shocks.
The gas price at Waidhaus has a knock on effect for gas prices at European gas hubs because oil indexed gas contracts are typically priced on ‘take-or-pay’ arrangements. This requires a set volume of gas to be purchased each year under the contract. Where there is excess supply relative to demand, for instance during a milder winter than average as we have seen during 14/15, gas volumes imported above the required level of consumption are then resold into the secondary hub markets, which may depress prices if there isn’t sufficient demand to soak it up.
2.3.3 Ammonia costs
Since last quarter, we have updated our cost curves for full year 2015 cost estimates. Costs have fallen in many major regions over the last year, which has affected mostly those producers that have exposure to oil prices in their gas supply contracts, and those located in the FSU due to currency devaluation.
Nitrogen producers in Europe have seen their costs move down from being some of the most marginal producers to sit comfortably below high cost product in South East Asia and gas based producers in China. Central Europe, where the cost of gas is more closely linked to the price of oil than in Western Europe, have seen their cost base continue to fall as oil prices have fallen. As many of these gas contracts
price on a 3-6 month lag, we should start to see the $50/bbl oil price start feeding through during mid- 2015.
Western European hub markets have also fallen over the last quarter, mainly in response to higher than average levels of gas in underground storage and a warmer than expected winter which has helped loosen the supply/demand balance in the region. Furthermore, gas volumes originally purchased on take-or-pay contracts in central Europe are being sold into the secondary hub markets of Western Europe. This, along with the Euro’s recent depreciation compared to the dollar, is helping push prices below $8/MMBtu, which has given many Western European producers who buy gas on the spot market a significant cost advantage.
Diagram 2.8: Merchant Ammonia Export Cost Curve, 2015 Basis ($/t)
Data: CRU
Producers in the FSU have also seen their cost base fall, although this is mostly associated with the depreciation of the rouble compared to the dollar, where cost items such as wages, energy and rail freight are paid for in local currency making their site costs in US dollar terms fall. Domestic Russian gas prices which are regulated by the government and are denominated in roubles have fallen over the last quarter in USD terms in response to the devaluation of the Rouble which has come under pressure from international sanctions and the falling price of oil. The average industrial gas price in Russia is understood to be fixed for 2015 at 150 RUB/MMBtu but at current exchange rate expectations for 2015, around 62RUB/USD, this equates to only $2.4/MMBtu down from $3.5/MMBtu during 2014.
Producers in North America are also expected to see costs improve over the previous year. Our full year 2015, gas price estimate at Henry Hub is $3.07/MMBtu, significantly below 2014 which averaged $4.39/MMBtu.
Diagram 2.9: Gross Ammonia Cash Cost Curve, 2015 Basis ($/t)
Data: CRU
2.4 CRU’s Committed Capacity Forecast by Plant
Table 2.4: Timing of Expected Ammonia Capacity
http://mycru.crugroup.comAmmonia Market Outlook
Table 2.5: Timing of Expected Chinese Urea Capacity
Chapter 3 - Trade, Balance and Prices
3.1 Global Trade
Global trade is forecast to reach 19.1 million tonnes in 2019, a 5% increase on 2014. We expect lower global trade in the next couple of years as new world scale plants come online. This said, as stated in the last report, African and South-East Asian phosphate production growth in the medium run will drive an increase in ammonia imports. New capacity in Russia is also expected to increase global traded volumes.
Table 3.1: Global Exports (million tonnes ammonia)
Table 3.2: Global Imports (million tonnes ammonia)
3.1.1 North America
US ammonia imports in 2014 ended lower than the four prior years. High prices forced phosphates producer Mosaic to curbe production, and MissPhos’s bankruptcy led to low ammonia demand in the end of the year. Adding to this, severe winter weather in the Northern Cornbelt and the Dakotas halted ammonia applications much earlier than usual.
As Dyno Nobel’s plant in Waggaman comes online in 2016, we expect some of its merchant ammonia to displace Russian and Ukrainian tonnage. Ongoing gas curtailments in Trinidad are forcing Koch to import more ammonia from elsewhere. We do not expect this to change in the medium term as there does not appear to be an easy solution to the problem.
Table 3.3: North American Trade (million tonnes ammonia)
3.1.2 South Asian Imports
Indian ammonia imports ended on par with the last few years with most of it coming from Middle Eastern producers. The majority of ammonia in India is used in the Phosphate fertilizer industry for the production of DAP. Owing to high prices of phosphoric acid needed to produce DAP, producers shifted towards making NPK products in 2014, as the phosphoric acid requirements for NPKs are lower. As a
result the required ammonia was lower and imports for phosphate producers were down in 2014. In addition to the production of phosphate based fertilizer, ammonia is also used for several technical applications such as the production of nitric acid, technical ammonium nitrate, caprolactam and ammonium sulphate. The amount of ammonia used for these applications has been growing steadily over the years and last year’s increase in the production of technical ammonium nitrate compensated for the decrease in the ammonia imported by the phosphates industry.
Table 3.4: South Asian Imports (million tonnes ammonia)
3.1.3 East Asian Imports
East Asia mainly imports ammonia for technical uses such as the production of caprolactam and acrilonitrile. We expect the industry to grow over the years and therefore expect a slight increase in imports over the coming years.
Table 3.5: East Asian Imports (million tonnes ammonia)
3.1.4 South East Asian Exports
Given the easy access to sea, South-East Asia is both an importer and exporter of ammonia. Indonesia is the largest producer of ammonia in the region and we expect them to have exported around 0.8 million tonnes and imported 0.3 million tonnes. In the medium term, we expect the region to increase their import requirements for ammonia as new phosphate production comes online in Vietnam (DAP and MAP) and Indonesia (NPKs).
Table 3.6: South East Asia + Oceania Imports (million tonnes ammonia)
3.1.5 Middle East Exports
Iranian exports were slower than expected in 2014 but we saw the first spot cargo leave the country since sanctions were lifted at the start of 2014. We expect to see an increase in Iran’s exports as it regains its share in the global market.
Table 3.7: Middle Eastern Exports (million tonnes ammonia)
3.1.6 Ukraine Exports
Exports from Ukraine were 0.7 million tonnes in 2014, significantly down from prior years as a result of the ongoing problems in the country. In 2015, Group DF’s Stirol Gorlovka plant remains shut. However,
we do not see these problems persisting in the long term and forecast exports from Ukraine to go back to norm by 2019.
Table 3.8: European Exports (million tonnes ammonia)
3.1.7 CIS Exports
In 2014, Russian exports of ammonia ended at 3.6 million tonnes, historically a high level for the country. Most of these extra volumes replaced the tonnage that Ukraine was not able to export over the year.
Russian exports are expected to continue growing over the forecast period with new export aimed capacity coming online.
Table 3.9: CIS Exports (million tonnes ammonia)
3.2 Ammonia Price Construction
Ammonia price developments are determined by various drivers, which either have a direct impact on price volatility or contribute to global market sentiment. The influence or dominance of different factors may vary from year-to-year. Energy prices are most important for the ammonia market as they determine cash production costs. On the demand side, developments in the phosphate market are also a significant driver of ammonia prices. The major factors affecting and determining the price level of ammonia are represented in the following flowchart.
In short-term ammonia supply/demand fundamentals determine the direction of price. Understanding the supply/demand balance of gross (total) ammonia is important; however, since the bulk of global ammonia production is consumed on-site where it is produced, understanding the supply/demand balance
of merchant ammonia is more important. About 10% of the globally produced ammonia is traded internationally. Just over 25% of the merchant supply comes from Trinidad, somewhat reduced over the past two years because of curtailed gas flows to ammonia producers. Two major markets, USA and India, account for nearly 45% of global imports and their demand fluctuations play an important roles in price setting. Therefore, the interaction between demand and supply is closely monitored when forecasting prices.
3.3 Pricing Fundamentals and Price Drivers
3.3.1 Fundamentals
CRU’s nitrogen forecasting methodology is based upon a combination of underlying supply-side and demand-side fundamentals and price drivers. On the demand-side we consider crop prices as key indicator of fertilizer affordability and of future agricultural plantings. Higher crop prices will raise farm revenues and margins, triggering a supply response and increased fertilizer applications as farmers seek to improve yields and may expand harvested areas.
Table 3.10: Nitrogen Fundamentals & Price Drivers, 2012-2019
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics, IMF, USDA, APX
On the supply-side, we track the major factors of production in the regions home to the ammonia market’s marginal production; Ukraine and Eastern Europe. On the demand-side we are tracking the major broadacre grain markets (especially US corn, where direct-application ammonia is used for fertilization) as well as the DAP market (ammoniated phosphate production is one of the major downstream consumers of ammonia).
We are also following developments in the urea market where the value of the wider nitrogen market is often determined. Chinese coal prices are crucial to the price of urea in the urea market’s present state of chronic oversupply, and will have an influence on the future value of ammonia.
3.4 Ammonia Price Driver Analysis
CRU has carried out a statistical analysis of all of the supply-side and demand-side fundamentals that we track as part of nitrogen analysis and tested them for correlation with FOB Middle East ammonia prices. There are strong correlations between ammonia and fundamentals on both the supply- and demand-side; the most significant being the prices of DAP and US corn on the demand-side, and oil on the supply-side. The price of urea is also strongly correlated as the main downstream consumer of ammonia. However, as all urea is produced form captive, on-site ammonia production it is unlikely to be playing a direct role in price formation in the merchant/traded ammonia market. Rather, its role is more as a gauge of nitrogen values. Given that over 55% of the world’s nitrogen requirement is supplied as urea it is our formation that the base-value of nitrogen is set in the urea market and that other nitrogen products will value to their degree of scarcity and their favourable/unfavourable attributes (higher handling costs in the case of ammonia).
Together the price time-series for urea, DAP, corn and oil account for around 85% of the price variation in month-to-month Middle Eastern ammonia prices. We have presented standardised, long-run time series for all of these prices in the following charts (plotted against ammonia to show correlation).
Like other nitrogen products ammonia markets appear to be mean-reverting and typically supply-driven. However, as there are many downstream, non-fertilizer industries consuming urea there are periods where
ammonia prices deviate from the agricultural trends given by urea, DAP and corn markets. Having included oil, we believe that it will, to some degree, act as a proxy for other petrochemical industries’ consumption of ammonia.
CRU uses annual price forecasts of these four fundamental price-drivers to provide our analysts guidance on future price direction. As these variables only explain 85% of the ammonia price, further analysis and more qualitative analyst input is required. It should also be noted that these pricing fundamentals do not
account for marginal costs of production, nor do they account for market tightness that results from constrained capacity (tightening of the S/D balance resulting from curtailments of capacity).
Price-drivers: Ammonia Forward Guidance
•Cheap Chinese coal has caused a deflationary period in the urea market as China continues to expand its urea exports, yr-on-yr as its coal- based production costs fall.
•Most EU gas contract formulas operate on an indexation basis to the price of Brent crude with a six-month lag. In Ukraine, contracts are currently settled on a nine-month lag to Brent. And oil prices have collapsed to half of their trend value.
•Consecutive years of high output and inventory build up have put corn prices under pressure. Near ideal growing conditions in the USA, saw production move to a record 361 million tonnes in 2014, preceded by 351 million tonnes in 2013.
3.5
3.0DAP
2.5Urea
1.5Corn
1.0Oil
0.0 -0.5 -1.0 -1.5 -2.0
Data: CRU, EIA, IMF, World Bank
3.5 Global floor price calculation
Statistical analysis of the ammonia markets supply- and demand-side fundamentals can only provide us medium-term price guidance, rather than an extant price forecast. We will need to constrain prices at the lower bound with an estimate of the industry’s short-run marginal costs. That is the breakeven price of the facilities producing the last tonnes required to clear the market. Based on our current assumptions those producers would be Ukrainian.
Producers in Ukraine as well as other major producing regions in Central and East European rely on supplies of imported Russian gas as the feedstock for their ammonia production process. These gas supplies are sold on long-term take-or-pay contracts, indexed to the price of Brent crude oil on what are termed Groningen-type contracts. These contracts are based on replacement value theory: in the past oil was consumed in Europe for power-generation and heating purposes and was substitutable for gas. As
Russian gas had/has very low production costs, it was priced on an oil basis to account for its substitutability for oil in the European energy consumption mix.
In the table we have used our calculated oil-indexed gas price for Ukraine (9-month lag to our forecast of Brent crude) and modelled the weighted-average cost of ammonia exports at Yuzhnyy port. The costs are taken from CRU’s Nitrogen Fertilizer Cost Report and are on an annualised basis. This means it is an average breakeven price for the year and a producer may well, for a period, sell at a price lower than their annual breakeven price in the expectation that prices may recover in the future. There are also costs such as maintenance and payroll taxes that do not require in-year payment and may be postponed.
Table 3.11: Ukraine: Export Costs, 2014-19 ($/t)
The chart below plots our regression based ammonia price forecast at FOB Black Sea against our forecast of Ukrainian export costs. CRU’s hypothesis is that the unlike the urea market, the ammonia market is not currently chronically oversupplied and that the world will require Ukrainian ammonia production and will need to pay a price in excess of Ukrainian marginal costs in 2015 to incentivise production and export.
Diagram 3.11: Implied Prices Forecast Below Ukrainian Cost Floor ($/t)
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
Data: CRU
3.6 Medium-term Price Forecast
Our medium-term pricing model uses the supply- and demand-side fundamentals to create a trend price over the five-year cycle. This trend price is the adjusted to factor two major considerations: market scarcity and marginal costs. As a measure of market scarcity we use our calculated global operating rate and for marginal cost we use outputs from our ammonia export cost curve generated by our Nitrogen Fertilizer Cost Model.
Table 3.12: Forecasting Ammonia Prices – Input Variables Index
•Urea Outlook: Declining raw material costs for urea via formulae based natural gas contracts and lower coal values in China have triggered a cut in CRU’s outlook for urea values over recent months. CRU is expecting weak energy prices to combine with market oversupply and remain the defining narrative in the urea market to 2017. Our lower expectations for both the Chinese coal market and the major oil benchmarks make it difficult to find support for scarcity-driven price increases much before 2018, especially as we are forecasting five new US urea plants to have begun operation by the close of 2016.
•DAP Outlook: CRU’s forecast for FOB Tampa DAP prices is tightly linked to supply-side developments. Over the medium term, two of the world’s major producers will increase capacity significantly: OCP and Ma’aden. We forecast such capacity growth to outpace growth in demand significantly, particularly for high-analysis products (DAP, MAP and TSP). At the same time, we are forecasting that Brazil to develop more domestic MAP capacity, resulting in lower imports to one of the world’s MAP largest markets. The combined action of these expansions will result in a significantly weaker international market.
•Corn Outlook: Corn prices fell sharply between April and September 2014, with the CRU corn index (2006=100) flagging from 238 to 172. Near ideal growing conditions in the largest producer – the USA – saw production move to a record 361 million tonnes, preceded by 351 million tonnes in 2013. While demand remained strong, the consecutive years ample output allowed inventories to expand to more comfortable levels, putting downward pressure on prices. Exacerbating this pressure was good production in other major growers and exporters including China, Brazil, the European Union and Ukraine. Price movements since September have been two-sided and we feel prices have found their floor. Comfortable inventory levels will mute upwards price movements over the near-term, however outlooks for lower plantings in 2015 will provide some support, as will strong demand.
•Oil: Oversupply is dominating oil markets and despite the collapse in values, the US achieved a record year for production in 2014. We are expecting annual average oil prices to halve in 2015 before returning to trend by 2018.
Diagram 3.12: FOB Black Sea Ammonia Trend Forecast ($/t, nominal)
500
400
300
200
100
0
Diagram 3.13: FOB Black Sea Ammonia Forecast ($/t, nominal)
550
500
450
400
350
300
Data: CRU
The chart above outlines the difference between our ‘trend price’ forecasting model and our final ammonia price forecast. The trend price certainly plays a role and has forced a substantial downgrade of our 2015 and 2016 Black Sea prices as all of our input indices are considerably more negative this quarter than in December 2014.
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
Table 3.13: Annual price forecast, $/tonne, nominal
3.7 Risks to the forecast
Global Oil Prices Return to Trend: Our current forecast is based on an improvement in the urea supply and demand balance by 2018 and for a substantial increase in the price of oil. Our expectation in that the Brent crude benchmark price will return to trend by 2018, with prices stabilising above $100/bbl on a nominal basis. Should prices stay depressed it is likely that nitrogen values will not perform as strongly as we have forecast.
Russia/Ukraine: The situation in Ukraine looks to have stabilised this quarter and we are expecting negotiations between Russia, Ukraine and the EU to yield a stable gas price which will pass on the gains from weak oil prices to Ukrainian producers. However, should the situation worsen and Russia starve Ukraine of energy or enforce a price for gas in the $11-13/MMBtu range prices at Black Sea may increase in-line with increasing marginal ammonia costs.
Iranian Sanctions: Western sanctions are having a real effect on the ability of international urea consumers to import product from the country. However, trade has far from ceased. CRU considers that in the short-term the lack of Iranian supply is largely factored into price expectations and therefore will have little positive effect. The scale of new capacity being commissioned elsewhere will also offset upside potential. The main pricing risk in the medium-term would be on the downside of pricing. Should trade restrictions on Iran be eased or removed in the medium-term the price effect would likely be negative. The need to regain market share at a point when large scale Iranian trade could return would result in downwards price pressure.
North African Output: However, North Africa continues to be an unreliable supplier and should imported LNG supplies not reach export-orientated, Egyptian ammonia producers availability in the Mediterranean and Atlantic may suffer. The Algerian government has also been obstructive with the issuance of export licenses.
Appendix A - The Long Term Outlook for the Ammonia Market
The primary purpose of CRU’s Ammonia Market Outlook is to provide a medium-term view of pricing dynamics in the global ammonia market. We define the medium-term as a period within which there is a reasonable ceiling for ammonia supply potential, set by our understanding of existing ammonia capacity and our view of committed future capacity. That is to say, all currently operational ammonia facilities, as well as the committed new investment projects that we believe will begin operation within a foreseeable timeframe. The length of our medium-term outlook is therefore limited to the period of time required to scope and assess the feasibility of a project and the time required for construction and commissioning; we estimate this timeframe to be five years.
In the short term, supply and demand decisions are independent of one another. Producers’ only available response to changes in demand is to control their variable costs, which are dependent on output volumes. At least one input cost is fixed, though in reality it is more likely that on a short-term basis several inputs are effectively quasi-fixed (e.g., labour, interest on debt and central overheads) and independent of the level of output. This means that operating decisions are based on the relationship between market prices and operating costs; in other words producers will make what they can of available raw materials, energy and production capacity. At the same time, demand decisions are a function of global economic activity. Accordingly, the main risk to our medium-term outlook is that significant imbalances between supply and demand inevitably lead to a sharp fluctuation in price. We call this “cyclical market risk”.
However, in the longer term, markets are self correcting. Periods of high prices encourage producers to invest in additional ammonia capacity. Whereas periods of low prices lead to a lack of investment in the market’s supply-side (and may encourage additional consumption). Therefore, over the long term, ammonia prices trend towards an average level that is set by the industry’s fundamental supply characteristics. Resource availability (gas and coal availability) and technological advancement are the major risks to the longer-term outlook and we refer to this as “structural risk”.
Our main assumptions when assessing long-term ammonia pricing dynamics are threefold:
•Firstly, that food consumption and economic growth will determine demand for nitrogen fertilizers, while industrial productivity and technological development will provide the basis for non-agricultural nitrogen demand
•Secondly, that there is an implied supply gap based on our view of foreseeable capacity (existing supply and committed future supply) and the forecast of long-term ammonia demand
•And finally, that supply will respond to this implied market scarcity and resulting ammonia price increases with new capacity investments, the operating and capital costs of which will provide the basis for the ammonia price trend over the long run
A.1 The long-term outlook for ammonia demand
We have taken our global nitrogen fertilizer demand forecast to 2018 as the starting point for our long- term forecast and made long-term projections based on required growth in agricultural production and industrial production forecasts. An explanation of the work that underpins our forecast of agricultural production is provided in the following pages. In using the projections for agricultural production as a basis for our ammonia fertilizer forecast, we have made two key assumptions:
1.We have assumed that fertilizer consumption moves in line with agricultural production.
Since the end of the Green Revolution in the late 1970s, there has been extremely high correlation between consumption of mineral fertilizers and agricultural production. This is particularly clear if fertilizer consumption in the USSR is removed from the data – central planning policies in the USSR saw fertilizer consumption far beyond the requirements of agriculture from the mid-1960s to the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1992. The diagram below shows that the global five-year average intensity of fertilizer use has been 21.5-24.0 kg nutrient per tonne of agricultural production since 1980, a period in which the world’s agricultural production has doubled.
It is of course possible that some structural change will cause this relationship to break down, but this would require some major technological innovation far beyond the incremental improvements in non- fertilizer drivers of agricultural production that we are seeing today. The possibility that the impact of increases in fertilizer use on yields diminishes (particularly in developing economies) only serves to put greater pressure on expanding cultivated land area in order to meet the forecast requirements of agricultural production.
Diagram A.1: World Fertilizer Nutrient Consumption (1968-2013)
Note: excludes fertilizer consumption in the USSR up to its dissolution in 1992.
2.Having determined a forecast of total nutrient consumption, we estimate how nutrient ratios may change given projected changes to crop mix and to nutrient intensity.
Nitrogen consumption growth outstripped consumption of other nutrients for many years up until the early 1990s. Since then, nutrient ratios have stabilized, and indeed potash showed signs of reversing this trend in the early 2000s. However, the sharp increase in potash and phosphate prices since 2007 has impacted demand for these nutrients and consumption growth has again fallen behind nitrogen. But in the long-term, we regard today’s nutrient ratio as conservative and believe that there is scope for potash consumption growth to outperform nitrogen consumption growth as a result of changes in the global crop mix and a move in developing countries to more balanced fertilizer use, reducing reliance on nitrogen.
Table A.1: N Consumption Forecast Relative to P&K;
Note that in the last edition of this Report, the fixed N:P:K ratio case was presented as the base case, with a range of downside scenarios. We are now presenting the fixed N:P:K ratio case as a high case, and the base case now includes some balancing of the global N:P:K ratio. As a result of this, the long-term nitrogen fertilizer consumption and ammonia demand forecasts presented subsequently are substantially lower than those in the last Report.
The ratio of potash to phosphate consumption has been much more stable historically, and while some fluctuation is inevitable, we do not expect any structural shift in the global P2O5:K2O ratio over the forecast period.
Diagram A.2: Nitrogen fertilizer and urea consumption forecast
Diagram A.2 above shows CRU’s long-term forecast for total nitrogen consumption, as well as for ammonia; both shown in million tonnes of nutrient. As can be seen, ammonia has become increasingly more important in supplying the nitrogen requirement for crop application, both as a result of its increased availability globally and thanks to new developments providing more constant nutrient release subsequent to its application.
We forecast this trend to increase over time, reaching 63% of total nitrogen demand by 2038, based on the expectation that a more competitive market and higher global availability will play in favour of ammonia on a world scale. Regional developments might very well differ from this, as is the case for recent demand growth for UAN1 and ammonium sulphate in the USA. CRU has the view that the effects of localised changes in fertilizer preference are not expected to significantly alter the forecast for global nitrogen balances.
Non-fertilizer uses for ammonia include resins and adhesives, animal feed, flame retardants, de-icing and stabilization of explosives, which are assumed to grow following our macroeconomic projections for global industrial production. A major source of growth is forecast to come from the use of ammonia in the abatement of toxic nitrogen oxides (NOx) from vehicle exhaust and various stationary emitters.
Our total solid ammonia forecast is shown in the Diagram A.3 below, which also depicts the breakdown of ammonia into technical and fertilizer use.
Diagram A.3: Gross ammonia demand forecast to 2038
1Our forecast reflects solid urea for direct application and use in NPK compounds only, hence the solution used in UAN production is not part of the urea forecast.
Focus on long term outlook for food and agricultural markets
Demand for fertilizers is determined primarily by the outlook for production of agricultural crops, which is closely related to food consumption, as well as the need for animal feed, natural fibres and biofuels. Taking into account these factors, in order to forecast medium term fertilizer consumption, CRU uses a bottom-up forecast of nutrient demand, based on forecasts of food demand and harvested areas. These forecasts consider factors such as crop plantings, applications rates (which are affected by crop prices and fertilizer prices), economic cycles and population growth (and in turn changes in income and diet).
Over the long term it becomes more difficult to predict the development of many of these variables, especially the timing or duration of economic cycles driving income changes. Instead, the focus of analysis is on the structural elements that determine trend levels and rates of growth through time. The drivers of fertilizer demand that will persist over the long term will be food consumption (driven by population growth and changes in income) and changes in productivity. There are also issues that deserve consideration in order to appreciate whether there could be any significant changes in these structural drivers, such as resource availability, technological advances, and climate change.
CRU appreciates that these are significant issues with wide ranging implications that cannot be fully investigated within the context of this report. However, it is important that we understand the main issues facing participants of agricultural markets and the following section provides an overview for agricultural markets and fertilizer demand over the long term (2019-2039).
Food consumption
Over the long run, population growth and income growth will determine food consumption. CRU has examined food demand measured by calorific intake as a function of per capita GDP. A 2007 study from the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO) shows that as income per capita rises in developing countries, their calorific intake also increases rapidly, but over time growth in calorific intake does not keep pace with growth in income.
Changes in income also impact people’s diets. As income rises, people tend to spend money on more expensive, better tasting foods – moving away from staple foods, such as cereals, to consuming to more meat, edible oils, and dairy products. For example, according to the FAO, from 1990-2007 incomes in East Asia rose by 6.0% p.a.: during this time consumption of meat and fish rose by 3.6% p.a. and consumption of eggs and dairy products rose by 5.9% p.a., while consumption of cereals and root vegetables actually fell. The switch towards more meat consumption requires higher levels of agricultural production and resource use, so total grain production per capita rises as income increases.
CRU has made forecasts of future food consumption, as measured by nutritional intake (kilocalories), based on the position of key regions on the curve, and projections for growth in income per capita (driven by population and GDP forecasts). This means that those regions with lower incomes per capita are assumed to experience faster growth rates in food consumption than those with higher incomes per capita.
The forecast for food consumption assumes that the world population will grow from 7.1bn to 8.9bn by 2039, equivalent to 0.9% p.a. This growth is expected to be driven by lower income countries, with Africa contributing 820 million to total growth. CRU’s forecasts for GDP are a function of working populations and labour productivity. Growth will increasingly be driven by the developing economies, which can still support relatively rapid labour productivity growth, and hence GDP growth.
Based on population and income growth projections, CRU forecasts world food consumption (measured by calorific intake) to reach 9,900 trillion kcal by 2039, compared to 7,300 trillion kcal in 2013.
Data: FAO, CRU
Agricultural production
Whilst crop production is subject to seasonal and cyclical variations, such as the influence of unpredictable weather conditions and changes in crop prices, over the long-term, production growth in agricultural crops tracks demand. However, will agricultural producers be able to feed 8.9 billion people the 9,900 trillion kilocalories CRU forecasts will be needed by 2039? CRU believes that the ability of agriculture to meet future demand for food will be principally governed by resource constraints and agricultural productivity and these issues are considered below.
(i) Resource constraints
CRU believes that the most notable resource constraints to future agricultural production are the availability of land and water. Agricultural producers need to increase agricultural land area and/or increase yields, but there are concerns that the availability of arable land may become a limiting factor.
The FAO’s Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) study estimates that around one third of the world’s land surface is of prime land (capable of yields of more than 80% of the “potentially attainable” maximum) and good land (capable of 40-80% of potentially attainable yields) for rain-fed agriculture. This potential land for rain-fed crop production totals around 4.5 billion ha, of which 3.2 billion ha is still not yet under cultivation. Whilst this seems to provide ample scope for agricultural expansion, in reality much of this land is not presently suitable for crop production due to the following reasons:
1)the land is already under an alternative competing use, such as woodland, urban areas, infrastructure;
2)the available land is unevenly distributed, with the majority in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America;
3)the land available may not be suitable for the crops that are most in demand;
4)the infrastructure necessary to support large-scale farming may inadequate or absent altogether.
CRU believes in addition to any physical constraint on land area, there is also an economic constraint (i.e. there could be land available but it might be uneconomic to farm, subject investment costs, land quality and prevailing crop prices) that will be reached earlier. As this economic limit is approached it will become increasingly slow and costly to bring new marginal land into production – meanwhile crop yields will need to rise significantly to compensate for the constraint on available arable land. Based on current literature, CRU is of the opinion that overall the world will not reach the physical and economic bottleneck in land availability within the forecast period (to 2037), but shortages of arable land will pose problems in some areas, notably North Africa and South Asia. Moreover, there will need to be the incentives in place, including higher crop prices and public investment, in order to enable the substantial investment needed to create roads, silos and other requirements, as well as for farm machinery, agronomy, herbicides, pesticides and significant nutrient applications to make available land productive.
Water scarcity is a complex issue, on account of the many competing demand sectors, such as residential, agricultural and industrial. The agricultural sector is by far the biggest consumer of water, but its share of global freshwater withdrawals has trended downwards since the late 1980s. Nonetheless, according to the FAO, there are still ample opportunities to increase water use efficiency, through better water resource management, provided the necessary incentives are in place.
On balance, given the high productivity of irrigated land, CRU believes that constraints on water resources represent a significant risk to demand growth for food and fertilizers over the forecast period. Despite there being sufficient water resources at a global level, the FAO and other bodies do stress the inequality in distribution of water resources, and the fact that an increasing number of countries are facing dangerous levels of water scarcity, most notably in North Africa, South Asia and parts of China. Moreover, greater climate variability owing to climate change provides a greater degree of uncertainty, meaning regions could experience more periods of severe water shortages or flooding.
(ii) Agricultural Productivity
Facing resource constraints, the main means by which agricultural producers can meet future demand is by increasing productivity. According to the FAO, over 1961 to 2009, more than three quarters of the world’s growth in crop production can be attributed to improvements in agricultural yields, as opposed to land expansion and increased cropping intensity. However, what is of most concern is: can further
improvements be made in agricultural productivity in order to enable continued increases in average yields over the long term?
There has historically been a clear correlation between GDP per capita and crop yields, implying that further, possibly greater, improvements can be expected based on our forecasts for income growth. Many countries still have huge scope to bridge the gap between attainable and actual yields through improvements in the use of technology, crop husbandry, fertilization and irrigation, and agronomic best practice (including nutrient application). Although there are concerns that further gains in productivity might not be possible from a technical perspective or that resource constraints may counter productivity gains, current literature suggests that further yield improvements are possible. However, the pace of change will certainly be dependent on public policy and investment measures to incentivise the necessary development. Although some efforts to improve productivity may in fact have negative implications for fertilizer consumption, such as precise application techniques to minimize losses, fertilizer use will continue to play an important role in productivity gains in many countries.
Aggregate yield (t/ha)
CRU has made a high level forecast of future agricultural production based on its food consumption forecast and assumptions about the ability of agricultural output to grow and meet future demand. By taking into account changes in income, it allows for dietary changes over the long term, but it does not allow for any unforeseen step changes in output growth rates, owing to wealth effects. CRU forecasts
agricultural production to grow by 1.4% per annum over 2019 to 2039, rising from 8.4 billion tonnes in 2014 to 12.0 billion tonnes in 2039.
It should be stressed that CRU’s forecasts allow for some agricultural production being driven by non- food uses, most notably biofuel production. World biofuel output experienced exceptional growth of 22% per annum on average over 2000 to 2011, but this rate is now slowing as governments exercise more caution in their policy support for biofuels compared to in the early 2000s. It is worth remembering that biofuel crops often yield other products (such as soyabean meal or distiller's dried grains), which are used in the food chain.
Risks to the Outlook
The forecast presented above represents CRU’s Base Case Scenario for long term consumption and production of food, which is used to drive our long term forecasts for fertilizer demand. However, CRU recognises forecasting consumption over such a long period of time is fraught with risks and uncertainties, which could result in significantly different scenarios.
•Stronger than expected energy prices or wider policy support for wider biofuel initiatives could increase the share of industrial demand in future agricultural production and accelerate the period in which we reach the economic and physical constraint in available arable land.
•CRU appreciates that the long term impact of climate change is hugely uncertain and has assumed that the net macroeconomic effect of climate changes and measures to tackle it are neutral. However, we expect a greater unpredictability and extremity in weather events, and hence crop production, over the long term.
•There are upside and downside risks associated with biotechnology and the introduction of new farming methods and technologies. An increase in yields resulting from such technologies serves to boost absolute crop production, and allows some marginal land to come back into use – both factors are positive for long term fertilizer consumption. Conversely, many technologies aim at using bespoke formulations and targeted application to maximize the effect of fertilizers and minimize physical wastage, resulting in lower fertilizer unit consumption.
•The exact impact of past and future agriculture and industry on the world’s biodiversity cannot yet be fully appreciated. There is the possibility that greater than expected environmental degradation of resources, such as water and land, could result in constraints on agricultural production being brought forward, and could limit the gains possible in productivity. An example of a danger to biodiversity is the noted fall in bee numbers, which could result in lower levels of pollination and in turn reduced fertility over the long term, if sustained.
A.2 Long-term guidance: CRU’s LRMC methodology
To provide longer-term ammonia price guidance beyond the five-year horizon of our cyclical forecast, CRU has provided a forecast of the industry’s long-run marginal costs (LRMC). Our LRMC methodology is based primarily on the assumption laid out in the previous section; that in the long-run prices will always trend towards the LRMC in a competitive market. Furthermore, we assume that the LRMC represents the economic cost (including capital charges) of building the market clearing (last tonnes required) ammonia capacity required to meet demand in each given year. However, it should be noted that our forecast of LRMC is not intended to provide a literal forecast of ammonia prices in each given year. Rather our intention is to provide a long-term trend or equilibrium price, about which the cyclically determined ammonia price will fluctuate over time.
During commodity price cycles we fully expect the price to increase above or below the LRMC. There could be any number of drivers of this disconnect including structural raw material shortages (gas availability), unforeseen additional global consumption and unexpected production losses (civil unrest, war, natural disasters). When the price is above this level we expect additional investment to be attracted into the sector, leading to more ammonia capacity, lower nitrogen pricing and lower returns. This helps to drive the price back towards its long run attractor. Conversely, there will be periods when we expect the price to fall below the LRMC. Plant construction may be undertaken under expectations of growth and price scenarios that do not materialise. Overcapacity may become an issue driving price setting away from the LRMC. Under these circumstances capital is not attracted to the industry, new plants are not built (or delayed) and closures may be accelerated. Ultimately this should lead to a tighter market, a higher nitrogen pricing and a reversion towards the LRMC trend price.
To calculate LRMC we must consider three main elements:
•Operating costs of new world-scale ammonia plants built in representative target countries. These countries have been selected on the basis that investors in the nitrogen industry will be attracted to regions that have access to energy supplies (fuel and feedstock) and capital at competitive rates.
•The capital expense of building new world-scale ammonia plants and the weighted-average cost of capital used to determine the capital charge per tonne. As outlined in the previous bullet point, this is often a regional consideration. The capital charge per tonne will be determined by regional engineering and construction costs and a cost of capital that will reflect the minimum return that equity and debt holders will require for bearing risk.
•The future rate of change in these variables. LRMC is not a single fixed price and will evolve as input costs and capital costs inflate (or deflate) over our forecast period. We have developed a weighted basket of inflation factors that will determine the rate of increase in our nominal LRMC forecast.
A.3 Choice of regions for LRMC
CRU takes the average economic costs of ammonia production in five regions to represent global LRMC in our base year (2012). The economic costs are determined by representative greenfield/brownfield standalone ammonia plants, the details of which can be found in the following table. We have selected the FSU, the Middle East, North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa and the USA as regions where we foresee plants being built over the next 25 years.
The basis for selecting these regions is their ready access to supplies of competitively priced hydrocarbon feedstock (natural gas and coal) and access to capital at a reasonable rate. We have excluded China and India from our LRMC for structural reasons, despite both countries currently (China) or recently (India) attracting investment. Years of tariff gas pricing in India have eroded the business case for private-sector investment in domestic gas production and distribution infrastructure. The country is now chronically short of gas and has resorted to the international LNG market for its balance of supply. While we do not think investment in Chinese plants is a purely economic consideration given the government’s clear desire to promote the expansion of capacity to create a domestic oversupply situation. Longer-term, China will need to address its worsening air quality problems, the result of its huge coal consumption.
Central Asia aside, Sub-Saharan Africa and the MENA remain the last regions where gas can still, to some extent, be considered a stranded resource. Gas production is often associated (with oil production) and Iran and Qatar possess the largest reserves of natural gas after Russia. While Iran’s recent geopolitical isolation limits its investment opportunities in the near-term, the Persian Gulf and Algeria remain attractive to investors, chiefly on the back of the state’s active role in limiting gas price tariffs to below $1.50/GJ to encourage domestic consumption. Our outlook for MENA gas prices is a real-terms increase over the LRMC forecast period to account for a shift to non-associated gas production as associated fields wind-down and require greater re-injection of gas to recover marginal barrels of oil. Sub-Saharan Africa clearly has plentiful hydrocarbon resources as well as convenient freight access to export markets in India and Brazil, although the level of political risk, lack of infrastructure and the problem of corruption do lead to higher country risk premiums and capital charges. However, on balance, we think that improving institutions of state, infrastructure investment and the development of civil society are supporting growing foreign direct investment (FDI) and that capital inflows to develop initially export-orientated nitrogen capacity is very likely. Given structural tightness in the merchant ammonia market, some level of dedicated merchant supply would also appear likely.
It is our view that Russia does not require significant additional capacity to support domestic ammonia consumption. However, the country’s ammonia production base is in need of modernisation. It is this recycling of existing capacity for efficiency gains, coupled with incremental domestic demand that will necessitate the new brownfield ammonia projects over the LRMC forecast period (the project in our baseyear calculation represents a brownfield expansion). The scale of US ammonia import dependence currently stands at around 6.0 million tonnes.
A.4 LRMC base year: 2013$
The LRMC calculation is based on two main cost components: business costs and economic costs. Business costs are calculated on a cash costs basis, before being adjusted to include additional costs associated with the sales and marketing of the ammonia, central overheads and working capital. Full economic costs include an additional capital charge to account for the market value of the asset over its remaining productive lifetime, charged at the weighted average cost of capital (WACC).
Table A.2: Ammonia Business and Economic Costs (real 2013$)
*includes annual sustaining capital, charged at 1.5-3.0% of the assets’ market value
Our base year is constructed using a “typical plant” approach, whereby we have based our plant assumptions on a world-scale 2,050tpd basis for the non-US plants and a 2,200tpd configuration for the US plant. All costs are based on CRU’s nitrogen cost methodology. Our assumption is that all of the NGSR plants have a gas conversion efficiency of 31MMBtu/tNH3, equivalent to 32.7GJ/tNH3. Steam, power, labour and consumable charges are fully broken out and accounted for in the previous table. CRU’s business costs methodology requires that maintenance, sustaining capital and central sales and admin expenses be charged on a per tonne basis.
Our business costs are calculated with an additional realisation charge or credit. This net realisation adjusts the business costs at all four plants on a Yuzhnyy basis for direct comparison and allows us to calculate the global LRMC. Essentially all production costs have been netted-back to Yuzhnyy, allowing for differences in land and ocean freight to each plant’s target market.
Our economic costs are based on the plant’s market value, amortisation period and the industry weighted average cost of capital (WACC). We have estimated each plant’s market value based on observed, real- world announced capital expenditure (capex) and have then made a 10% upwards adjustment to account for typical construction overruns. A portion of the plant’s capital expense needs to be charged during the construction period and this is again accounted for in the final capex numbers in the plant specifications above. The capex is amortised over 25 years to account for the plant’s useful lifetime (we assume that there is no terminal value, i.e. scrap value is at most equivalent to the cost of a shutdown) and charged at the real WACC. One final step when calculating the full economic costs for the LRMC is to tax the return to equity at the local corporate tax rate (dividends returned to equity holders are taxable). To avoid double counting the tax shield on financing (inherent in the WACC), the implied cash flows must be treated as if each project were 100% equity financed.
Our WACC is calculated using 20-year US Treasury bills as our benchmark for the risk free interest rate and the total return on the S&P; 500 index over 40 years for the return to equity in the cost of equity component. We have calculated our beta coefficient on a US basis, using an average beta of listed US companies, while the cost of debt is based on corporate debt yields of the major industry players. This method provides our baseline industry WACC. A country risk premium ranging from 1% to 3% has been added to the WACC to account for regional risk as perceived by an international investor (local investors may well use a lower WACC as perceptions of risk vary).
Over 75% of the cost components in the base year are accounted for by energy costs and capital charges. This means that the rate of LRMC escalation over the 25-year forecast will be determined by energy price and capital cost inflation. It also means that investors will be seeking to control costs by building in areas with cheap construction and labour costs as well as access to secure, low priced gas (or coal).
A.5 LRMC inflation indexes
Our global average LRMC base year is forecast to 2038 using an inflation index derived from a weighted basket of cost inputs (table and chart below). We have divided the economic cost profiles outlined in the previous section into five indices, weighted to represent their proportion of overall economic cost. These are capital, energy, labour, supplies and ocean freight, forecasts, generated by CRU’s in-house economics team. It should be noted that our LRMC inflation index does not directly account for foreign exchange movements against the dollar. However, all of our original forecasts for energy and labour are denominated in local currency before being adjusted to nominal dollar terms. We have made an allowance for technological advancement and efficiency gains; the LRMC inflation index is discounted for a gradual shift from 31.0 to 29.0 MMBtu/tNH3 and ammonia plant capacity creep from 2,500tpd to 3,500tpd over the forecast period.
Table A.3: LRMC inflators to 2037
Diagram A.4: Weighting of LRMC inflators
Labour, 0.8%
Supplies,
9.2%
Freight, 12.8%
Capital, 44.5%
Resource &
Energy, 32.8%
Data: CRU
Capital inflation: The index is calculated using CRU’s expectations for chemical plant specific capital expense and includes construction, equipment and local inputs. Currently we expect an annualised growth rate of 1.8% over 25 years (below our US GDP deflator indicating a long-term real decrease in costs). Chemical plant equipment costs follow similar trends to other process equipment costs such as mining and metallurgy; these are underpinned by their exposure to macroeconomic fundamentals. In the medium term, chemical equipment costs are forecast historically high levels, though still remaining below the current level of inflation. While currently elevated above historical levels, our expectation is that equipment costs will remain relatively flat as supply constraints weaken. Construction and labour costs are likely to rise over the medium term, especially as our forecast for emerging market currencies appreciates against the dollar. However, labour and construction costs are far lower for the chemical industry than that of mining and other heavy industries and as such this is expected to have a limited affect on our modelled index.
Energy and Resources: Over the long term, CRU expects to see gas become increasingly commoditised by greatly expanded LNG supply. Gas supply increases in North America from unconventionals will help fuel this expansion, as technological advances continue decreasing the cost of producing the country’s shale and coal bed methane resources. A more competitive and liquid LNG market is expected to reduce the real prices in West and Central Europe over the long term. The Asia Pacific regions reliance on LNG imports is expected to remain and the region will continue to be the price-setting region for LNG contracts. We have aggregated gas prices in these regions and weighted them by expected consumption. We expect gas prices across these regions to grow at an annualised rate of 4.3% which is expected to be the second fastest growing inflator to our LRMC calculation behind that of labour costs.
Middle Eastern and North African countries, which currently have plentiful supplies of cheap natural gas, and are expected to continue monetising this resource through LNG and nitrogen production. The movement away from associated gas production towards dedicated production should raise regional gas extraction costs. Prices are expected to undertake real-terms increases in MENA reflecting higher production costs. However, we still expect gas prices to fertilizer producers to remain the most competitive in the world.
In Russia, increased domestic competition has the potential to lower the cost of gas exports to Central and Western Europe and with slow demand growth in these regions, Russian gas producers are expected to seek higher revenues in their domestic market. As such, we expect the domestic Russian gas price to increase over the medium term, towards export parity pricing, implying a significant downside risks to fertilizer producers’ margins.
Chemical Supplies: CRU’s chemical supplies index represents inflation from both services and site consumables (such as parts and non-process materials) required to keep the business functioning and the plant operating at its optimum efficiency. The weighted average index of countries is expected to inflate at 1.9%, just below the level of GDP inflation.
Ocean Freight: Ocean freight rates over the long term will be linked to the price of bunker fuel and time- charter rates for large ocean going vessels. Bunker fuel prices are expected to remain relatively flat over the medium-term forecast period. Based on CRU’s medium-term estimates for the EU’s ETS carbon trading scheme, we see little upside risk to the price of bunker fuel. However, over the longer term, we expect bunker fuel prices to rise significantly as the ETS legislation is tightened and carbon prices rise. Time charter rates are expected to increase over the long term. However, in the short term, prices are set to remain below historical values as pressure from global oversupply weighs on pricing.
A.6 Long-run marginal cost forecast, 2013-2039
The results of our global ammonia LRMC forecast can be seen in the charts below, based on our current view of the ammonia market, likely regions for capacity expansion and our forecasts of energy price inflation. As such, this forecast is very dependent on the regions selected to attract additional ammonia projects. Should these regions change, for example if access to competitively priced gas is exhausted, we could have a higher average cost structure in our base year and a higher LRMC.
Rather than average all of the regions’ economic costs to produce our base-year urea LRMC, we have taken an average of the marginal, market clearing country/regions weighted by production. In this instance, our LRMC is based on the full economic costs of greenfield plants in Russia and the USA. This also means that our inflation index only includes gas, labour, power and consumables price forecasts for these regions. So, our base-year 2012 LRMC of $342/t at Yuzhnyy and is inflated to an LRMC of $6940/t in 2038.
At the time of writing, the wider nitrogen market is moving towards oversupply and ammonia prices are moving closer to the market’s short-run marginal costs (SRMC) on an fob Black Sea basis. The LRMC has typically been lower than SRMC as efficiency gains and access to cheap gas supplies at new greenfield plants are offset by significant capital servicing charges incurred by ammonia plants that are moving closer to $1 billion on a capex basis, while older, less efficient existing plants at the margin continue to operate on a mostly debt-free basis. We currently consider producers in Europe and Ukraine to be the market clearing tonnes, setting a support price of around $390-420/t. Ease of access to large domestic agricultural and chemical markets, and political concerns about job and food security have kept 1970’s and 1980’s vintage plants open when they perhaps would otherwise have closed.
Having the markets SRMC above LRMC over the last five years has encouraged record levels of urea investment in China, the USA, MENA, the FSU and South East Asia. And a full project pipeline has the potential to add upwards of 40.0 million tonnes of efficient, low cost new solid urea capacity well. However, the merchant ammonia has not seen nearly as much investment and the market remains relatively tight (relative to urea) and we are not expecting to see closures of merchant ammonia capacity unless it is heavily integrated with a loss-making urea plant. However, given the debt-free status of these marginal urea/ammonia plants and the low, if any, residual capital value of a marginal plant (with the potential to return negative cash flows), we would expect a slow rate of displacement. This rate of displacement is further slowed by non-economic considerations. Many plants in China, the Balkans and the FSU play an important societal role supporting employment in their locality, as well as propping up precious foreign currency reserves. Also, the survival of these marginal tonnes will to some extent be supported by the real-terms increase in ammonia values our forecast is suggesting.
One last thought, with prices falling to SRMC and the medium-term outlook weakened by the prospect of oversupply, investment should slow (indeed, weaker investment fundamentals are already causing delays or cancellations to projects in scoping or feasibility). But that doesn’t mean that we would expect investment to grind to a halt, or for marginal producers’ lifetime to be extended, as there is still a case for investors in particularly low-cost regions to capture profits found below the pricing level set by the industry’s SRMC. A producer in the MENA region for example, could build and operate a profitable plant with the ammonia market pricing in the $350-400/t range, earning a profit in excess of its operating expenses, business costs and returns to debt and equity holders at the project WACC.
Table A.4: LRMC forecast, 2013-2039 ($/t)
Appendix B - Industrial and economic outlook, 2015-2019
•Weak growth and soft inflation prompts rash of rate cuts
•Policy divergence means €/$ parity and yen at ¥130 by Q4
•Poor data bring China’s downside risks back into spotlight
B.1 Overview
The US Federal Reserve removed the word “patient” from its statement on 18th March – a reference to the central bank’s approach to tightening monetary policy. The move effectively set the US on course for higher interest rates later this year. The Fed also downgraded its interest rate forecasts, leading us to expect that rates will begin to be hiked from September, not June. Central banks around the world, including those in China, India, Thailand, Indonesia, South Korea and Australia have loosened monetary policy. While the moves are partly reactions to expected US rate hikes, looser policy is also motivated by combinations of weaker than expected economic growth, soft inflationary pressures, and weaker than expected demand from China.
Monetary policy divergence is a central theme of our forecasts. Aside from in Asia, other major central banks are also in easing mode. The ECB’s Quantitative Easing (QE) programme began on 9th March and looser policy has already weighed on the single currency. We’ve significantly lowered our euro forecast this month and we now expect a euro to be worth $1.00 by the end of this year, from €/$0.92 ($/€1.08) forecast last month.
As a share of GDP no other central bank is expanding its balance sheet on the scale of the Bank of Japan. With CPI likely to turn negative again soon, and with the BoJ determined to raise inflation expectations, we now expect a second extension to QE in Q2. Anticipating this decision we’ve weakened the yen by 10% throughout the forecast and expect the yen will fall to ¥130 against the US$ by the end of this year, from our previous forecast of ¥119.
China has started the year poorly with industrial production growth especially weak. Over January and February, IP growth fell to 6.8% y/y, from 7.6% in Q4 with the main drag on growth coming from the real estate downturn. In our view, if the government’s target for GDP growth of “around 7%” is to be met, policy will need to become more supportive. In our feature this month, we’ve reviewed the March meeting of the 12th National People’s Congress (NPC), an annual event at which key objectives are set and main risks identified for the year ahead.
Our forecast of global GDP growth is little changed from last month. Our expectations of softer industrial production growth in China and also in the US this year has pushed down our global IP growth
forecast to 3.2% from 3.6% last month. In China we’re now forecasting IP growth of 7.5% this year (from 7.9% last month) and in the US we expect 3.5% IP growth (from 4.3%). We view China’s recent run of poor data as a growing downside risk to our global forecast and have analysed an investment crunch in our scenario.
Upside risks
•US recovery takes-off: The US economy could finally take-off, bringing a stronger economic rebound as pent up domestic demand is released. Stronger world trade would benefit all, especially export- dependent emerging economies.
•Indian economic renaissance: The government used its strong mandate to launch a positive Union Budget for this financial year. If reforms are implemented more quickly than expected, India could return to 8%+ GDP growth.
•Oil prices permanently lower: Crude oil is 50% lower than seven months ago, providing a net boost to the global economy. Staying at these levels for longer, cheap oil would boost global GDP growth by 20-30bp pa over 2015-17.
Downside risks
•China crash: A massive increase in debt and a bold program of structural reforms mean that risks are increasingly skewed to the downside as we go forward, especially for investment and construction A large negative risk for commodity markets.
•Eurozone stagnation: The region is recovering but Greece’s financial problems are unresolved and could trigger a renewed recession made harder to escape from by lingering deflationary pressures.
•Russia/Ukraine: Escalating tensions could spill over to a wider economic impact if Russian energy exports or international prices are affected. We see the risk of this as low due to Europe’s and Russia’s mutual dependence on energy trade.
Table B.1: World food, agricultural and fertilizer prices (percentage change year-on-year)
Data : OE, CRU
Table B.2: Industrial production in selected major economies (percentage change year-on-year)
Data : OE, CRU
Notes: Except for 'Africa', regional totals include countries not shown in the table
Table B.3: Real GDP Agriculture
(percentage change in real GDP/GNP year-on-year)
http://mycru.crugroup.comAmmonia Market Outlook
Table B.3: Real GDP Agriculture
(percentage change in real GDP/GNP year-on-year) – Concluded.
Data : OE, CRU
Table B.4: Population Growth
(percentage change in population year-on-year)
Data : OE, CRU
B.2 Exchange rates
B.2.1 Trade-weighted dollar drives upwards again
After climbing 6% since the start of the year, the trade weighted dollar has lost some of its strength this month. Underwhelming US data releases have tempered the dollar’s strength but with these Q1 data hurt by the transitory impact of cold weather and west coast port problems, a reversal in fortunes in Q2 and diverging monetary policy will continue to make the dollar relatively attractive. CRU sees the dollar continuing to gain this year but at a lesser pace as the RMB and the euro find support near current levels.
B.2.2 Monetary policy divergence still key for euro
The euro has recovered some ground against the dollar recently, having briefly dropped below 1.05€/$. It is currently trading at around 1.09€/$ (0.91$/€) but volatility is high. The rally followed a Federal Reserve press conference where, despite a change in forward guidance – no longer being ‘patient’, markets focused on Janet Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors, emphasising that they’re not going to be ‘impatient’. Nonetheless, monetary policy divergence continues to underpin the forecast. Our forecast has been revised this month; we now expect the euro to reach 1.00(€/$) by the end of 2015 and maintain that level, with little evidence that monetary policy will converge, in the medium term.
B.2.3 Balance of risks remain on downside for RMB
As CRU noted previously, the Chinese authorities appear reluctant for the RMB/$ to fall much beyond
6.25.In March the yuan moved in a narrow range between a low of 6.27 and a high of 6.21 later in the month. We expect the RMB to come under renewed downward pressure as Chinese interest rates fall further and US rates rise: we forecast that the currency will quickly return to the lower bound of 6.25, staying there till mid-2016. However, in real effective terms the RMB reached a new high in February according to the Bank for International Settlements, 9.7% above its 2014 average. The balance of risks is for the RMB/$ to be allowed to weaken beyond 6.25 to help exporters that are being squeezed by the weakness of other currencies.
B.2.4 More Bank of Japan stimulus to send yen to ¥130 by year- end
The yen has fallen by more than 12% against the US dollar so far this year compared to 2014. The Bank of Japan’s extension to its asset purchase programme (QQE) at the end of last year (when the annual pace of purchases was raised to ¥80 trillion from ¥60-70 trillion) has weighed on the currency and in March the yen fell to ¥121 to the dollar. We think that the sluggish economy and the central bank’s determination to lift inflation expectations will mean a further increase of QQE this year. We expect this to push the yen to ¥130 by the end of the year.
B.2.5Central bank supports Mexican peso
After falling to the weakest level on record against the US dollar this month, Mexico’s peso found support from the central bank which announced it would hold daily auctions of more than $50 million for the next three months on top of support offered whenever the peso depreciates by more than 1.5% in a day. Weak oil prices and security issues have damaged some of the optimism around the country’s wide- ranging reforms (aimed at improving potential growth in the economy) at a time when the dollar has gone from strength to strength. The peso has seen its slide accentuate recently but CRU expects the peso to appreciate through the year as domestic conditions improve.
Table B.5: Exchange rates, inflation rates and short-term interest rates (Exchange rate shown as local currency/US$, yearly averages)
Table B.5: Exchange rates, inflation rates and short-term interest rates (Exchange rate shown as local currency/US$, yearly averages)
– Concluded.
Data : OE, CRU
B.3 Macroeconomic outlook
Each month CRU reviews and updates as appropriate its economic forecasts. This section sets out the macroeconomic story, which underpins the forecasts in the preceding sections. The written analysis in this section is amended as and when there are material changes to the outlook. The date of the latest update is listed below.
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
http://mycru.crugroup.comAmmonia Market Outlook
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
http://mycru.crugroup.comAmmonia Market Outlook
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
http://mycru.crugroup.comAmmonia Market Outlook
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
Table B.6: World economic growth (percentage change in real GDP/GNP year-on-year)
Table B.6: World economic growth (percentage change in real GDP/GNP year-on-year) – Concluded.
Data: OE, CRU
Notes: Regional totals include countries not shown in the table; Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) is defined as the union of the Arab states Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE
B.4 Scenario
B.4.1 Upside: Lower oil - market struggles to find the bottom of the barrel
Crude oil prices have recovered some ground since sinking to $45/bbl in January, but remain soft at $60/bbl. Last year crude was driven up well beyond $100/bbl as market participants took to precautionary buying on the back of expectations of threats to output in the wake of unrest and conflict in MENA. Supply has returned and met with weaker than expected demand (since revised up by energy institutions), causing a surge in inventories, hitting prices.
Permanently lower oil prices are increasing likely, given Saudi Arabia’s change in policy to defend market share rather than prices. In this scenario, we consider the impact of lower prices throughout the forecast. We assume $42/bbl in 2015, before recovering to $70/bbl in 2017 through to 2019. Our assumption implies existing higher cost US shale oil output, with average short run marginal costs of $25- 30/bbl, continues unaffected. However, future production, is threatened. High decline rates mean that 50-70% of a well is drained within a year. Typically, new drilling requires prices around $65/bbl – meaning that in our scenario some output is lost.
Our estimates show that global growth is boosted by 20 to 30bp per year during 2015-17 but falls relative to the base case further out as prices recover. The impact varies by country: while net oil exporters lose out, consumers of oil benefit. China and India stand to gain the most from reduced import bills and improved fiscal balances. Economic growth in both China and India increases by a up to 60bp in 2016. GDP growth in the Eurozone, US and Japan also picks up pace under the scenario. On the other hand, lower oil prices mean a drop in revenue for net oil exporting economies. Russia, reliant on oil and gas for two-thirds of exports, is amongst those most worse off relative to our base case, falling by almost three percentage points more in 2015.
Table B.7: Alternative Scenario – Oil prices stay lower longer (percentage change in real GDP/GNP year-on-year)
Table B.7: Alternative Scenario – Oil prices stay lower longer (percentage change in real GDP/GNP year-on-year) – Concluded.
B.4.2 Downside: China investment crunch
As CRU has repeatedly warned, the balance of risks to the Chinese outlook are to the downside. Post- 2008 China experienced an increase in credit that is enormous by international historical experience as local governments and corporates binged on credit to fund investment. Total Social Financing (TSF) excluding equity – a measure of credit outstanding – ballooned from 115% of GDP at the end of 2008 to 187% at the end of 2014. Experience of other countries is that large and rapid increases in leverage are associated with financial crisis. China is also undertaking structural reforms affecting key elements of the economy, including State Owned Enterprises, local government finances and the financial sector. The reforms are vital for China’s future longer-term economic success, but bring with them implementation risks.
In this scenario the risks come to fruition, causing investment growth to grind to a halt in 2015 (base case 5.9%) due to real estate downturn and local government cutbacks. Industrial output growth slows to 3% (7.5%). The government responds with infrastructure investment, looser fiscal policy, eased housing market restrictions and growth supporting reforms. Having learnt lessons from 2008, however, the response is smaller and slower this time. Investment recovers in 2016, lifting industrial output growth which also benefits from re-stocking. Medium term growth rates return towards the base case, but the level of GDP in 2019 is 3% smaller (equal to US$385bn) than in the base case. The GDP impact is smaller than that seen in other countries that experienced a financial crisis, reflecting : our base case already factors in slowing growth due to the challenges China faces; the low share of foreign currency debt; and the capacity for the government to respond. Our base case GDP forecast for 2015-2019 averages 6.6% p.a. compared to the 8.6% recorded in the five years to 2014 and the 10% trend growth prior to that.
China’s downturn hits other countries via reduced imports, particularly of commodities as both prices and volumes weaken. Investor confidence around the world also suffers, which is particularly damaging to vulnerable emerging market countries.
Table B.8: Alternative Scenario – China investment crunch (percentage change in real GDP/GNP year-on-year)
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
Table C.1: N Fertilizer - Consumption, '000 tonnes N
Table C.1: N Fertilizer - Consumption, '000 tonnes N - Continued.
Table C.1: N Fertilizer - Consumption, '000 tonnes N - Continued.
Table C.1: N Fertilizer - Consumption, '000 tonnes N - Concluded.
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
Table D.1: Ammonia - Consumption, '000 tonnes N
Table D.1: Ammonia - Consumption, '000 tonnes N - Continued.
Table D.1: Ammonia - Consumption, '000 tonnes N - Concluded.
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
Table E.1: Ammonia - Production, '000 product tonnes
Table E.1: Ammonia - Production, '000 product tonnes - Continued.
Table E.1: Ammonia - Production, '000 product tonnes - Concluded.
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
Table F.1: Ammonia - Capacity, '000 tonnes
Table F.1: Ammonia - Capacity, '000 tonnes - Continued.
Table F.1: Ammonia - Capacity, '000 tonnes - Concluded.
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
Table G.1: Ammonia - Imports, '000 tonnes N
Table G.1: Ammonia - Imports, '000 tonnes N - Concluded.
Ammonia Market Outlookhttp://mycru.crugroup.com
Table H.1: Ammonia - Exports, '000 tonnes N
http://mycru.crugroup.comAmmonia Market Outlook



Anders Isberg  |  Lorenzo Lennie  |  Laima Alavočiūtė  |  Chris Lawson  |  
Research Analyst | Nitrogen  |  Research Analyst | Nitrogen  |  Data Manager  |  Demand Analyst | Fertilizers  |  
e anders.isberg@crugroup.com  |  e lorenzo.lennie@crugroup.com  |  e laima.alavociute@crugroup.com  |  e chris.lawson@crugroup.com  |  



Alexander Singleton  |  Deepak Chitroda  |  Gavin Ju  |  
Cost Analyst | Fertilizers  |  Consultant (Mumbai)  |  Senior Consultant  |  
e alexander.singleton@crugroup.com  |  e deepak.chitroda@crugroup.com  |  | Nitrogen & Potash (Beijing)  |  
   |  e gavin.ju@crugroup.com  |  
   |     |  



Nick Edwards  |  Paul Burnside  |  Juan von Gernet  |  Alberto Persona  |  
General Manager  |  Principal Consultant | Potash  |  Team Leader | Phosphates  |  Consultant | Phosphates  |  
e nick.edwards@crugroup.com  |  e adam.wang@crugroup.com  |  e juan.vongernet@crugroup.com  |  e alberto.persona@crugroup.com  |  



Yoston Montoya Garcia  |  Sarah Marlow  |  Michael Mew  |  Kimberly Gustin  |  
Research Analyst | Phosphates  |  Senior Consultant | Phosphates  |  Principal Consultant | Phosphates  |  Senior Consultant  |  
e yoston.montoyagarcia@crugroup.com  |  e sarah.marlow@crugroup.com  |  e michael.mew@crugroup.com  |  | Sulphur & Sulphuric Acid  |  
   |     |     |  e kimberly.gustin@crugroup.com  |  



Peter Harrison  |  Thierry Tran  |  Daniel Soloman  |  Issac Zhao  |  
Senior Consultant  |  Research Analyst  |  Consultant  |  Senior Consultant  |  
| Sulphur & Sulphuric Acid  |  e thierry.tran@crugroup.com  |  e daniel.soloman@crugroup.com  |  | Phosphates & Sulphur (Beijing)  |  
e peter.harrison@crugroup.com  |     |     |  e issac.zhao@crugroup.com  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |     |     |  Page  |  
Executive Summary  |  1  |  
Chapter 1 - Demand  |  9  |  
1.1  |  Global Ammonia demand overview  |  9  |  
1.2  |  Agricultural Markets overview  |  11  |  
   |  1.2.1  |  Recent agricultural developments  |  11  |  
   |  1.2.2 Short and medium term considerations  |  13  |  
1.3  |  NH3 Demand from Ammoniated Phosphates  |  18  |  
1.4  |  Anhydrous Ammonia (direct application) demand  |  21  |  
1.5  |  Technical ammonia demand  |  22  |  
   |  1.5.1 NH3 demand from the caprolactam industry  |  22  |  
   |  1.5.2  |  Acrylonitrile  |  23  |  
   |  1.5.3  |  Methyl Methacrylate  |  24  |  
1.6  |  Other Ammonia Consumers  |  24  |  



Chapter 2- Supply  |  25  |  
2.1  |  Outlook for Ammonia Supply  |  25  |  
2.2  |  Regional Ammonia Supply Outlook  |  29  |  
   |  2.2.1  |  East Asia  |  29  |  
   |  2.2.2  |  North America  |  31  |  
   |  2.2.3  |  CIS  |  36  |  
   |  2.2.4  |  Africa  |  38  |  
   |  2.2.5 South and Central America  |  39  |  
   |  2.2.6  |  Middle East  |  40  |  
   |  2.2.7  |  South Asia  |  41  |  
2.3  |  Ammonia Production Costs and Feedstock Prices  |  43  |  
   |  2.3.1 US gas production is putting prices under pressure  |  44  |  
   |  2.3.2 Weak oil market weighs on European gas prices  |  44  |  
   |  2.3.3  |  Ammonia costs  |  46  |  
2.4  |  CRU’s Committed Capacity Forecast by Plant  |  49  |  



Chapter 3 - Trade, Balance and Prices  |  51  |  
3.1 Global Trade  |  51  |  
3.1.1  |  North America  |  52  |  
3.1.2  |  South Asian Imports  |  53  |  
3.1.3  |  East Asian Imports  |  54  |  
3.1.4 South East Asian Exports  |  55  |  
3.1.5  |  Middle East Exports  |  57  |  
3.1.6  |  Ukraine Exports  |  58  |  
3.1.7  |  CIS Exports  |  59  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |     |  Page  |  
Chapter 3 - Trade, Balance and Prices (continued)  |  51  |  
3.2  |  Ammonia Price Construction  |  60  |  
3.3  |  Pricing Fundamentals and Price Drivers  |  61  |  
   |  3.3.1 Fundamentals  |  61  |  
3.4  |  Ammonia Price Driver Analysis  |  62  |  
3.5  |  Global floor price calculation  |  64  |  
3.6  |  Medium-term Price Forecast  |  66  |  
3.7  |  Risks to the forecast  |  69  |  
Appendices  |     |  
Appendix A - The Long Term Outlook for the Ammonia Market  |  71  |  
A.1  |  The long-term outlook for ammonia demand  |  72  |  
A.2  |  Long-term guidance: CRU’s LRMC methodology  |  80  |  
A.3  |  Choice of regions for LRMC  |  81  |  
A.4  |  LRMC base year: 2013$  |  82  |  
A.5  |  LRMC inflation indexes  |  84  |  
A.6  |  Long-run marginal cost forecast, 2013-2039  |  86  |  
Appendix B – Economic Outlook  |  89  |  
B.1  |  Overview  |  89  |  
B.2  |  Exchange rates  |  94  |  
B.3  |  Macroeconomic outlook  |  96  |  
B.4  |  Scenario  |  105  |  
Appendix C – Nitrogen Fertilizer Consumption  |  109  |  
Appendix D – Ammonia Consumption  |  113  |  
Appendix E – Ammonia Production  |  117  |  
Appendix F – Ammonia Capacity  |  121  |  
Appendix G – Ammonia Imports  |  125  |  
Appendix H – Ammonia Exports  |  127  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  Page  |  
Chapter 1 - Demand  |  9  |  
Table 1.1: Regional total ammonia demand  |  9  |  
Table 1.2: Demand by end use for major consumers (million tonnes)  |  10  |  
Table 1.3: Global wheat crop conditions  |  13  |  
Table 1.4: Crop Prices and Potential Direction  |  15  |  
Table 1.5: Ammonia required in DAP and MAP (‘000 tonnes)  |  20  |  
Chapter 2- Supply  |  27  |  
Table 2.1: Changes to ammonia Capacity Since Last Quarter  |  25  |  
Table 2.2: Global Ammonia Capacity Outlook, 2013-2019 (million tonnes)*  |  26  |  
Table 2.3: Changes to Chinese ammonia capacity since last quarter  |  30  |  
Table 2.4: Timing of Expected Ammonia Capacity  |  49  |  
Table 2.5: Timing of Expected Chinese Urea Capacity  |  50  |  
Chapter 3 - Trade, Balance and Prices  |  51  |  
Table 3.1: Global Exports (million tonnes ammonia)  |  51  |  
Table 3.2: Global Imports (million tonnes ammonia)  |  51  |  
Table 3.3: North American Trade (million tonnes ammonia)  |  53  |  
Table 3.4: South Asian Imports (million tonnes ammonia)  |  54  |  
Table 3.5: East Asian Imports (million tonnes ammonia)  |  55  |  
Table 3.6: South East Asia + Oceania Imports  |  56  |  
Table 3.7: Middle Eastern Exports (million tonnes ammonia)  |  58  |  
Table 3.8: European Exports (million tonnes ammonia)  |  59  |  
Table 3.9: CIS Exports (million tonnes ammonia)  |  60  |  
Table 3.10: Nitrogen Fundamentals & Price Drivers, 2012-2019  |  61  |  
Table 3.11: Ukraine: Export Costs, 2014-19 ($/t)  |  65  |  
Table 3.12: Forecasting Ammonia Prices – Input Variables Index  |  66  |  
Table 3.13: Annual price forecast, $/tonne, nominal  |  69  |  
Appendix A - The Long Term Outlook for the Ammonia Market  |  71  |  
Table A.1: N Consumption Forecast Relative to P&K;  |  73  |  
Table A.2: Ammonia Business and Economic Costs (real 2013$)  |  82  |  
Table A.3: LRMC inflators to 2037  |  84  |  
Table A.4: LRMC forecast, 2013-2039 ($/t)  |  88  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  Page  |  
Appendix B – Economic Outlook  |  89  |  
Table B.1: World food, agricultural and fertilizer prices  |  91  |  
Table B.2: Industrial production in selected major economies  |  91  |  
Table B.3: Real GDP Agriculture  |  91  |  
Table B.4: Population Growth  |  93  |  
Table B.5: Exchange rates, inflation rates and short-term interest  |  95  |  
Table B.6: World economic growth (percentage change in real  |  103  |  
Table B.7: Alternative Scenario – Oil prices stay lower longer  |  105  |  
Table B.8: Alternative Scenario – China investment crunch  |  107  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  Page  |  
Chapter 1 - Demand  |  9  |  
Diagram 1.1: Global ammonia demand components  |  10  |  
Diagram 1.2: Global grain and oilseed stocks:use ratio and price indices  |  12  |  
Diagram 1.3: Wheat conditions & forecast harvest area (% y-y change)  |  14  |  
Diagram 1.4: Net futures trading positions on US agricultural markets  |  14  |  
Diagram 1.5: 2015 forecast harvested areas, top 5 growing countries  |  16  |  
Diagram 1.6: 5-year crop price projections  |  16  |  
Diagram 1.7: Ammoniated phosphates production forecast  |  20  |  
Diagram 1.8: Average nitrogen fertilizer use in the United States  |  22  |  
Diagram 1.9: Regional caprolactam capacity, 2014 (‘000 t)  |  23  |  
Chapter 2- Supply  |  27  |  
Diagram 2.1: Ammonia Capacity Outlook, 2013-2019 (million tonnes)*  |  26  |  
Diagram 2.2: Forecasted Ammonia Capacity, 2015- 2019  |  26  |  
Diagram 2.3: Chinese production in 2014 (‘000 t) and Y-o-Y Change  |  30  |  
Diagram 2.4: New Russian Capacity  |  37  |  
Diagram 2.5: US gas production has been increasing even as monthly gas rig  |     |  
count falls  |  44  |  
Diagram 2.6: European contract gas lags oil by 6-9 months  |  46  |  
Diagram 2.7: Above trend European gas storage is weighing on prices  |  46  |  
Diagram 2.8: Merchant Ammonia Export Cost Curve, 2015 Basis ($/t)  |  47  |  
Diagram 2.9: Gross Ammonia Cash Cost Curve, 2015 Basis ($/t)  |  48  |  
Chapter 3 - Trade, Balance and Prices  |  51  |  
Diagram 3.1: United States Imports, 2014  |  52  |  
Diagram 3.2: India Imports, 2014  |  53  |  
Diagram 3.3: South Korea Imports, 2014  |  54  |  
Diagram 3.4: Indonesia Exports, Year-to-August 2014  |  55  |  
Diagram 3.5: Iran Exports, 2014  |  57  |  
Diagram 3.6: Ukraine Exports, 2014  |  58  |  
Diagram 3.7: Russia Exports, 2014  |  59  |  
Diagram 3.8: Ammonia Price Construction: Key Drivers  |  60  |  
Diagram 3.9: Demand-side price driver analysis  |  63  |  
Diagram 3.10: Supply-side price driver analysis  |  63  |  
Diagram 3.11: Implied Prices Forecast Below Ukrainian Cost Floor ($/t)  |  66  |  
Diagram 3.12: FOB Black Sea Ammonia Trend Forecast ($/t, nominal)  |  68  |  
Diagram 3.13: FOB Black Sea Ammonia Forecast ($/t, nominal)  |  68  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  Page  |  
Appendix A - The Long Term Outlook for the Ammonia Market  |  65  |  
Diagram A.1: World Fertilizer Nutrient Consumption (1968-2013)  |  72  |  
Diagram A.2: Nitrogen fertilizer and urea consumption forecast  |  73  |  
Diagram A.3: Gross ammonia demand forecast to 2038  |  74  |  
Diagram A.4: Weighting of LRMC inflators  |  85  |  
Diagram A.5: CRU’s LRMC forecast to 2037  |  87  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Available in October 2014  |  www.crugroup.com  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Global ammonia consumption (million tonnes)  |  172.6  |  173.0  |  176.7  |  180.8  |  185.1  |  189.1  |  193.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Global ammonia capacity (million tonnes)  |  205.0  |  208.6  |  215.5  |  225.0  |  230.7  |  234.2  |  236.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Global ammonia operating rate (%)  |  84.2%  |  82.9%  |  82.0%  |  80.3%  |  80.2%  |  80.8%  |  81.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
fob Yuzhnyy (US$/tonne)  |  496  |  482  |  403  |  387  |  403  |  410  |  443  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU, Fertilizer Week  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Comparison of CRU’s forecast history  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
$/tonne  |  Price forecast: FOB Black Sea  |     |  million t/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
600  |     |  245  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
550  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  235  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
500  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  225  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
450  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  215  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  205  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
400  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  195  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
350  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  185  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  175  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |  Mar-14  |     |  Jun-14  |     |  Sep-14  |     |  Q12015  |  Q22014  |  Q32014  |  Q42014  |     |  Q12015  |  



Confidential  |  Executive Summary 1  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



2000  |  2002  |  2004  |  2006  |  2008  |  2010  |  2012  |  2014  |  2016  |  2018  |  



Historical ratio  |     |  CME Futures  |  
   |  



   |  Capacity  |     |  Consumption  |     |  Operating Rate  |  
Million t/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Op. rate  |  
250  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  90%  |  
200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  85%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
150  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  80%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  75%  |  
100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  70%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  65%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  60%  |  
2000  |  2002  |  2004  |  2006  |  2008  |  2010  |  2012  |  2014  |  2016  |  2018  |  



Executive Summary 2  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Direct application ammonia demand (ave. 2010-2013) in the US  |  
> 600,000 t  |  
200,000 – 400,000 t  |  
100,000 – 200,000 t  |  
50,000  |  – 100,000 t  |  
10,000  |  – 50,000 t  |  
<10,000 t  |  



Confidential  |  Executive Summary 3  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  ∆%  |  
   |  2014-19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Gas price ($/MMBtu)  |  7.60  |  8.80  |  5.80  |  7.81  |  8.92  |  9.70  |  28%  |  
Gas cost  |  289  |  334  |  221  |  297  |  339  |  369  |  28%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Non-gas variable costs  |  13  |  9  |  10  |  10  |  11  |  11  |  -15%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Maintenance/sustaining capital  |  14  |  13  |  14  |  14  |  14  |  14  |  0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Overhead (SGAs and working capital)  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  20%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Ammonia Cash Cost  |  322  |  362  |  250  |  327  |  371  |  400  |  25%  |  
Freight  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Port Charges  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Cost at fob  |  348  |  388  |  276  |  354  |  397  |  427  |  23%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



CRU European Feedstock Price Forecast  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
European Natural gas: Russian contract  |  European Natural gas: Hub basis  |     |     |  
$/MMBtu  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  $/MMBtu  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
14.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  14.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
12.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  12.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  10.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
8.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  8.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  6.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  4.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2008  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  2008  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Data: CRU, IMF  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Data: CRU, Gaspool  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Executive Summary 4  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  Committed project  |     |  Non-committed project  |  



Confidential  |  Executive Summary 5  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



IRR  |  Effect of reducing capex on a Gulf Coast project's IRR  |  
20%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
18%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0% premium  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
16%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  10% premium  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
14%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  20% premium  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
12%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  30% premium  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
8%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  40% premium  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
600  |  650  |  700  |  750  |  800  |  850  |  900  |  950  |  1000  |     |     |     |     |  



Executive Summary 6  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



$/t  |  Historical Ammonia  |  Forecast Ammonia  |  
600  |     |     |  



300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



   |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  ∆ 2014-19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Black Sea  |  546  |  476  |  492  |  403  |  387  |  406  |  434  |  460  |  -7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Middle East  |  572  |  500  |  519  |  425  |  410  |  429  |  457  |  483  |  -7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Caribbean  |  564  |  509  |  498  |  409  |  397  |  421  |  449  |  475  |  -5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Tampa  |  605  |  541  |  545  |  457  |  443  |  463  |  491  |  518  |  -5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India  |  571  |  550  |  539  |  451  |  436  |  456  |  485  |  512  |  -5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Far East  |  621  |  581  |  563  |  475  |  461  |  482  |  511  |  538  |  -4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Executive Summary 7  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Executive Summary 8  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
North America  |  20.2  |  20.8  |  22.8  |  23.8  |  24.2  |  24.3  |  3.7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Caribbean  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  -1.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Central America  |  1.0  |  1.2  |  1.5  |  1.5  |  1.5  |  1.5  |  8.3%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South America  |  3.2  |  3.3  |  3.8  |  4.4  |  4.5  |  4.6  |  7.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
CIS  |  13.9  |  13.5  |  13.8  |  14.4  |  15.2  |  16.5  |  3.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
East Europe  |  8.9  |  8.8  |  8.6  |  8.6  |  8.7  |  8.8  |  -0.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
West Europe  |  14.3  |  14.3  |  14.3  |  14.2  |  14.3  |  14.3  |  -0.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
East Asia  |  65.5  |  65.9  |  64.6  |  64.7  |  66.1  |  67.6  |  0.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Middle East  |  12.4  |  13.6  |  14.5  |  14.7  |  14.9  |  15.1  |  3.9%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South Asia  |  19.1  |  19.4  |  19.9  |  19.9  |  19.9  |  20.0  |  0.9%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South-East Asia  |  7.5  |  8.0  |  8.5  |  9.0  |  9.2  |  9.4  |  4.7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
North Africa  |  3.9  |  4.6  |  5.1  |  5.6  |  5.9  |  6.2  |  9.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
West Africa  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.4  |  1.1  |  1.6  |  1.8  |  67.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
East Africa  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  5.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Southern Africa  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Oceania  |  1.4  |  1.5  |  1.6  |  1.6  |  1.7  |  1.7  |  4.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Global total  |  173.1  |  176.9  |  181.0  |  185.2  |  189.3  |  193.1  |  2.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 1-9  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  Other  |     |  Urea  |  
   |     |     |  
Technical  |  11%  |     |  AN & CAN  |  
7%  |     |     |     |  
DAP &  |     |     |  Other  |  
   |     |     |  
MAP  |     |     |  Technical  |  
7%  |     |  Urea  |  DAP & MAP  |  
AS  |     |  54%  |  
4%  |     |     |  UAN  |  
UAN  |     |     |  
AN &  |     |     |  
4%  |     |  AS  |  
CAN  |     |  
   |     |  
   |  13%  |     |     |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Global  |  173.1  |  176.9  |  181.0  |  185.2  |  189.3  |  193.1  |  2.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  62.4  |  62.7  |  61.4  |  61.4  |  62.8  |  64.2  |  0.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Urea  |  42.0  |  42.1  |  40.3  |  40.0  |  41.0  |  41.9  |  -0.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- AN, CAN, CAN, AS  |  3.4  |  3.6  |  3.7  |  3.8  |  4.0  |  4.1  |  3.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Ammoniated Phosphates  |  5.9  |  5.9  |  5.8  |  5.8  |  5.7  |  5.7  |  -0.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Technical  |  3.6  |  3.9  |  4.2  |  4.5  |  4.8  |  5.1  |  7.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Other  |  7.3  |  7.3  |  7.3  |  7.3  |  7.3  |  7.3  |  0.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
United States  |  16.7  |  17.3  |  19.3  |  20.3  |  20.5  |  20.6  |  4.3%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Urea  |  1.8  |  2.0  |  3.2  |  4.1  |  4.2  |  4.2  |  18.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- AN, CAN, CAN, AS  |  5.9  |  6.3  |  7.0  |  7.0  |  7.1  |  7.2  |  4.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Ammoniated Phosphates  |  1.9  |  1.7  |  1.8  |  1.8  |  1.8  |  1.8  |  -1.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Technical  |  2.3  |  2.4  |  2.5  |  2.6  |  2.7  |  2.7  |  3.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Other  |  4.8  |  4.8  |  4.8  |  4.8  |  4.8  |  4.8  |  0.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 1-10  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India  |  14.9  |  15.3  |  15.6  |  15.7  |  15.7  |  15.7  |  1.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Urea  |  13.2  |  13.6  |  14.0  |  14.0  |  14.0  |  14.0  |  1.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- AN, CAN, CAN, AS  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.5  |  0.5  |  3.7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Ammoniated Phosphates  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.9  |  0.9  |  2.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Technical  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  6.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
- Other  |  0.4  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  -12.9%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 1-11  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  35%  |     |     |  Corn  |     |     |     |  Soyabean  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  30%  |     |     |  Wheat  |     |     |     |  Rice  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
ratio  |  25%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
to use  |  20%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
15%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Stocks  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10%  |  3/4 commodities now above ten year  |     |  
   |     |  average, soyabeans significantly higher.  |     |  
   |  5%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0%  |  2006  |  2007  |  2008  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  
   |     |  



2006  |  2007  |  2008  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  



Chapter 1-12  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Country:  |  Main nitrogen source: Comments:  |  
   |     |     |  
Canada  |  UAN, Urea  |  Most of the crop is spring planted, but winter planted crops in average  |  
   |     |  condition. Higher area expected on increased durum wheat plantings.  |  
   |     |     |  
United States  |  Ammonia, UAN, Urea  |  Crop conditions okay although winter conditions have been severe. Lower  |  
   |     |  prices to pressure spring sowings.  |  
   |     |     |  
Argentina  |  Urea, UAN  |  Area to fall following jump in 2014. Recent heavy rainfall will boost soil  |  
   |     |  moisture reserves.  |  
   |     |     |  
Europe  |  FGAN, CAN  |  Conditions very good, warmer than usual winter weather means  |  
   |     |  development is beyond normal stage. Little worry over winter-kill.  |  
   |     |     |  
Ukraine  |  FGAN  |  Dry planting period led to poor establishment, winter weather has been okay  |  
   |     |  but there have been some concerns over lack of snow cover and possible  |  
   |     |  frost damage.  |  
   |     |     |  
Russia  |  FGAN  |  Similar situation to Ukraine. Lack of credit in both countries also likely to  |  
   |     |  have an impact in sourcing inputs for spring planting.  |  
   |     |     |  
Kazakhstan  |  FGAN  |  Plantings expected to rebound following poor production in 2014. Planting  |  
   |     |  will begin in May.  |  
   |     |     |  
China  |  Urea  |  Slightly dryer conditions through planting were favourable and crop  |  
   |     |  established well. No major concerns over the winter period.  |  
   |     |     |  
India  |  Urea  |  Rabi season crop (responsible for a majority of production) to be harvested  |  
   |     |  soon. Plantings down slightly from previous years due to slow start, but  |  
   |     |  growing conditions have been very good and high yields expected.  |  
   |     |     |  
Australia  |  Urea, UAN  |  Summer rainfall on the east coast has boosted soil moisture levels, however  |  
   |     |  Western Australia has been mostly dry. Planting to begin in late April.  |  
   |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 1-13  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



  |  Crop conditions  |  30.0 (-2%)  |  
  |  Good  |  2.7(+4%)  |  
  |     |  
  |  Average  |  13.9 (0%)  |  
  |  Average/Poor  |  
  |     |  
  |  Poor  |  4.0(-5%)  |  
  |  Not planted  |  



   |  350  |     |  Wheat SRW  |     |  Corn  |     |     |  Soybeans  |     |     |  Sugar No.11  |  
   |  300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
traders  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
250  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
managedof money contracts)('000  |  200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  150  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
position  |  50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Net  |  -100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-150  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Aug-14  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Jan-14  |  Feb-14  |  Mar-14  |  Apr-14  |  May-14  |  Jun-14  |  Jul-14  |  Sep-14  |  Oct-14  |  Nov-14  |  Dec-14  |  Jan-15  |  Feb-15  |  Mar-15  |  



Chapter 1-14  |  Confidential  |  



  |     |  Share N  |  2014  |  YTD  |     |     |     |  
  |  Crop  |  demand  |  Price  |  2015 factors  |  However...  |  Crop price direction  |  
  |  change  |  
  |     |  (%)1)  |  Change  |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  Crops mostly in good condition  |  Crop and economic  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  coming out of the NH winter,  |  conditions in Russia and  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  FSU the major exception.  |  Ukraine should see  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  Good conditions in key  |  lower production. Both  |  ↔  |  
  |  Wheat  |  15%  |  -10% a)  |  -15%  |  are major exporters.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |  importing nations to impact  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  export demand and pressure  |  Russian govt. recently  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  prices.  |  announced export duty,  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  will they continue to  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  intervene on market?  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  Planted area set to expand in  |  Demand remains strong,  |  ↓  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  the US.  |  particularly from China.  |  
  |  Soyabeans  |  1%  |  -18% a)  |  -4%  |  Comfortable stocks to pressure  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  prices lower.  |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  Shift in acreage from corn to  |  US exporters face strong  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  soyabeans to continue.  |  competition. Higher  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  Rising demand, pinned to high  |  $USD adding to  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  pressure.  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  livestock prices and strong  |     |  ↑  |  
  |  Corn  |  16%  |  -11% a)  |  -7%  |  ethanol production.  |  China has overly  |  
  |  Stocks to use ratio could  |  abundant stocks.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  decline.  |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  Ukraine and Russia production  |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  to move lower on reduced  |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  planted area.  |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  Thailand expected to resume  |  Stocks to use ratio  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  their status as top exporter.  |  remains comfortable.  |     |  
  |  Rice  |  14%  |  -6% a)  |     |     |  Global stocks projected to  |  Quotations seen mostly  |  ↓  |  
  |     |  -2%  |  decline y-o-y.  |  declining towards end of  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  Trade to rise, reflecting  |  2014, likely to continue.  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  demand in Africa and Latin  |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  America.  |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  2014 was the 4th straight year  |  Stocks are still high,  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  of price declines.  |  quelling any bullish  |  ↔  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  Investments into sugar  |  sentiment.  |  
  |  Sugar  |  3%  |  -13%  |  c)  |  -8%  |     |  
  |     |  plantations falling.  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 1-15  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  Wheat  |     |     |     |  Corn  |     |  
   |  40  |     |     |     |     |     |  0.5%  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
hectares)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  -1.9%  |     |     |  
30  |  -2.0%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
(million  |     |     |  -1.0%  |  -1.5%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
20  |     |     |     |  -1.5%  |     |     |     |     |     |  
Area  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  0.5%  |     |     |  -5.8%  |     |     |  
Harvested  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.7%  |  0.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0  |  India  |  China  |  Russia  |  United States  |  Australia  |  China  |  United States  |  Brazil  |  India  |  Mexico  |  
   |     |  



   |  Soyabeans  |     |  0.9%  |  Rice  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
-0.2%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  4.7%  |     |     |     |  -0.5%  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  4.8%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  3.9%  |     |     |     |  1.1% 0.8%  |  1.2%  |  
   |     |     |  -1.5%  |     |     |     |     |     |  
United States  |  Brazil  |  Argentina  |  India  |  China  |  India  |  China  |  Indonesia  |  Bangladesh  |  Thailand  |  



Diagram 1.6: 5-year crop price projections  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  600  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Projections  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
(US$/t)  |  500  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
400  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
consensus  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
price  |  200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Global  |  100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0  |  Wheat  |     |  Corn  |     |  Rice  |  Soybeans  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  2007  |  2008  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Data: CRU, World Bank, IMF, EIU  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chapter 1-16  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



  |  A  |  B  |  C  |  Nutrient Demand  |  
  |  Crop Areas (based on  |  
  |  Food Demand  |  Application Rates  |  = B*C  |  
  |  A)  |  
  |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 1-17  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Chapter 1-18  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 1-19  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



20  |     |  Others  |     |  Russia  |     |  Morocco  |  
   |     |     |     |  
16  |     |  United States  |     |  China  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  



8  |  



4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  DAP  |  
   |  Others  |     |     |     |  Saudi Arabia  |  
   |     |     |  
   |  India  |     |     |     |  US  |  
   |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Morocco  |  
China  |     |  
2018  |  2019  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  5364  |  5910  |  5881  |  5837  |  5752  |  5701  |  5750  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
USA  |  2003  |  1880  |  1684  |  1785  |  1785  |  1785  |  1785  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Saudi Arabia  |  459  |  554  |  568  |  819  |  1020  |  1086  |  1152  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Morocco  |  662  |  748  |  842  |  775  |  917  |  1027  |  1102  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India  |  856  |  788  |  808  |  830  |  846  |  862  |  878  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Russia  |  627  |  555  |  596  |  621  |  621  |  621  |  621  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil  |  198  |  162  |  172  |  172  |  194  |  235  |  250  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
ROW  |  1379  |  1374  |  1505  |  1539  |  1541  |  1543  |  1554  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Total  |  11,548  |  11,971  |  12,057  |  12,377  |  12,676  |  12,860  |  13,092  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 1-20  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 1-21  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



1000  |     |     |     |     |  Nitrogen Solutions  |     |     |  Urea  |     |  Ammonia  |     |     |     |  
900  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
800  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
700  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
600  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
500  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
400  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |  Idaho  |     |  Oregon  |  Wyoming  |  Michigan  |  Kentucky  |  Montana  |     |  Washington  |     |     |     |  Missouri  |  Texas  |     |     |     |     |     |  Kansas  |  
Colombia  |  Louisiana  |  Arkansas  |  Oklahoma  |  Wisconsin  |  Ohio  |  California  |  South Dakota  |  Indiana  |  Minnesota  |  North Dakota  |  



Nebraska  |  Illinois  |  Iowa  |  



Chapter 1-22  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



2500  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2000  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1500  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1000  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
500  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  West  |  North  |  East  |  Japan  |  Taiwan  |  South  |  South  |  India  |  
   |  Europe  |  America  |  Europe  |     |     |  Korea  |  East Asia  |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 1-23  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Chapter 1-24  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



  |     |  Change from Last  |     |  to 2019  |     |  
  |  Plant  |  Quarter  |  Justification  |  forecast  |  Start-up  |  
  |  Indorama Elme  |  Pushed forward one  |  News that the plant construction is  |  ‒  |  2016  |  
  |  year to 2016  |  progressing faster than CRU initially expected  |  
  |     |     |  
  |  Shchekinoazot  |  Added to forecast in  |  Technology agreements signed  |  ↑  |  2017  |  
  |  2017  |  
  |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  Phosagro  |  Added to forecast in  |  Financing and EPC contract signed  |  ↑  |  2018  |  
  |  Cherepovets  |  2018  |  
  |     |     |     |  
  |  Navoiazot  |  Ammonia//Urea  |  Mitsubishi won tender for construction, still in  |  ‒  |  2018  |  
  |  Plant announced  |  negotiation stages – project not in forecast.  |  
  |     |     |  
  |  Yara/BASF  |  Ammonia Plant  |  Mitsubishi won tender for construction, still in  |  ↑  |  2019  |  
  |     |  announced  |  negotiation stages – project not in forecast.  |     |     |  
  |  Uralchem Perm  |  Added to 2019  |  Agreements with Stamicarbon for technology,  |  ↑  |  2019  |  
  |  (Minudobreniya)  |     |  and NIIK for compliance and design in place.  |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-25  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



2014  |  



2015  |  



2016  |  



2017  |  



2018  |  



2019  |  



million  |  Speculative  |     |  Probable  |  Firm  |     |  
tonnes  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
70  |     |     |     |     |     |  
60  |     |     |     |     |     |  
50  |     |     |     |     |     |  
40  |     |     |     |     |     |  
30  |     |     |     |     |     |  
20  |     |     |     |     |     |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |  
2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



Regional Supply forecast  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR 14 - 19  |  
West Europe  |  12.0  |  12.0  |  12.0  |  12.0  |  12.0  |  12.0  |  12.0  |  0%  |  
East Europe  |  16.1  |  16.1  |  16.1  |  16.1  |  16.1  |  16.1  |  16.1  |  0%  |  
CIS  |  18.4  |  18.6  |  19.2  |  19.8  |  20.8  |  22.3  |  23.1  |  4%  |  
Africa  |  7.6  |  8.0  |  9.0  |  10.4  |  11.5  |  12.4  |  12.6  |  10%  |  
North America  |  17.3  |  17.5  |  18.9  |  20.9  |  21.4  |  21.4  |  21.8  |  4%  |  
C&S; America  |  11.3  |  12.0  |  12.6  |  13.2  |  14.0  |  14.2  |  14.2  |  3%  |  
Middle East  |  17.8  |  18.5  |  18.5  |  18.5  |  19.0  |  19.6  |  19.6  |  1%  |  
South Asia  |  21.6  |  21.7  |  22.3  |  22.8  |  22.8  |  22.8  |  22.8  |  1%  |  
South-East Asia  |  9.8  |  10.1  |  10.2  |  11.5  |  12.2  |  11.9  |  11.9  |  3%  |  
Oceania  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  0%  |  
East Asia  |  70.9  |  71.9  |  74.6  |  77.9  |  79.2  |  79.9  |  80.0  |  2%  |  
World Total  |  205.1  |  208.7  |  215.6  |  225.4  |  231.4  |  235.0  |  236.6  |  2%  |  



Chapter 2-26  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-27  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |     |  Speculative  |  Probable  |  Committed  |     |  
   |  Raw materials/  |  Evaluating types of  |  Availability of gas and coal  |  Raw materials/feedstock  |     |  
   |  Feedstock  |  potential raw  |  defined, raw  |  supply secured, supply  |     |  
   |     |  materials/feedstock:  |  materials/feedstock supply  |  contracts signed.  |     |  
   |     |  availability and price.  |  contracts are under  |     |     |  
   |     |     |  discussion.  |     |     |  
   |  Finance/ Marketing  |  Funds in place for early  |  Feasibility study already in  |  Funds in place sufficient to  |     |  
   |     |  stage development, for  |  progress. Steps have been  |  complete construction with  |     |  
   |     |  (pre-) feasibility studies.  |  taken to start raising funds  |  adequate reserves for  |     |  
   |     |  Assumption that output is  |  for construction. In  |  contingencies. Off-takers  |     |  
   |     |  marketable at prevailing  |  negotiation with potential  |  identified and agreed or  |     |  
   |     |  market price.  |  off-takers, letters of intent  |  preliminary own sales  |     |  
   |     |     |  from potential customers,  |  strategy defined. Target  |     |  
   |     |     |  may include some trader  |  markets examined.  |     |  
   |     |     |  interest. Target markets  |     |     |  
   |     |     |  identified.  |     |     |  
   |  Technology/  |  Assumption that the plant  |  Assumption that the plant  |  Contracts to technology  |     |  
   |  Engineering  |  will use established  |  will use the standard  |  providers  |     |  
   |     |  technology. Cost estimated  |  technology and preliminary  |  awarded/announced,  |     |  
   |     |  based on similar projects.  |  capacity of nitrogen and  |  capacity is confirmed, EPC  |     |  
   |     |     |  downstream products is  |  contracts signed, costs  |     |  
   |     |     |  defined.  |  based on actual orders for  |     |  
   |     |     |     |  equipment and services are  |     |  
   |     |     |     |  defined.  |     |  
   |  External Factors  |  No obvious deal-breaking  |  EIS is nearing  |  Construction compliant with  |     |  
   |  (social, environment,  |  environmental issues,  |  completion/complete, local  |  all environmental  |     |  
   |  transportation)  |  logistics appear feasible,  |  and national approvals  |  regulations, logistics options  |     |  
   |     |  logistics options are being  |  secured, no major logistical  |  finalised (in construction).  |     |  
   |     |  considered.  |  barriers, approached  |     |     |  
   |     |     |  relevant parties for  |     |     |  
   |     |     |  logistics, engineering of  |     |     |  
   |     |     |  own infrastructure under  |     |     |  
   |     |     |  review.  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 2-28  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



Supply forecast  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR’14-19  |  
CRU base case capacity forecast  |  68.5  |  69.6  |  72.2  |  75.6  |  76.8  |  77.6  |  77.7  |  2.2%  |  
Firm  |  0.0  |  4.6  |  8.3  |  12.3  |  14.7  |  15.3  |  15.4  |  27.2%  |  
Probable  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.7  |  1.9  |  2.4  |  2.4  |  -  |  
Speculative  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  -  |  
Utilization rate  |  84%  |  89%  |  87%  |  81%  |  80%  |  81%  |  82%  |  -1.6%  |  
Production  |  57.2  |  62.2  |  62.5  |  61.2  |  61.2  |  62.6  |  64.0  |  0.6%  |  



Province  |  Ammonia (‘000 t/y)  |  Feedstock  |  Province  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Shanxi Tianze Coal & Chemical  |  400  |  anthracite  |  Shanxi  |  
Shanxi Yangmei Fengxi Jishan  |  300  |  coke oven gas  |  Shanxi  |     |  
Shanxi Yu County Chem  |  240  |  anthracite  |  Shanxi  |  
Jiangsu Linggu  |  450  |  bituminous coal  |  Jiangsu  |     |  
CNSG Kunshan Co.  |  260  |  coke oven gas  |  Jiangsu  |  
Hebei Zhengyuan Chem  |  450  |  bituminous coal  |  Hebei  |     |  
China BlueChemical Hegang  |  300  |  bituminous coal  |  Heilongjiang  |  
Erdos Yiding Coal Chemial  |  300  |  lignite  |  Inner Mongolia  |  
Shandong Mingshui Dahua Co.  |  300  |  anthracite  |  Shandong  |  
Xinjiang XLX Energy Chemical  |  280  |  bituminous coal  |  Xinjiang  |  
Qinghai Salt Lake Industry  |  245  |  bituminous coal  |  Qinghai  |  
Jinmei Tianqing  |  180  |  anthracite  |  Henan  |     |  
Sinofert Jilin Changshan  |  180  |  lignite  |  Jilin  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-29  |  



Plant  |  Change from Last Quarter  |     |     |  Justification  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  to 2019  |  Start  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  forecast  |  -up  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Erdos Yiding  |  Pushed backward a year to  |     |     |  Construction completed in H2 2014 with  |  −  |  2015  |  
Coal Chemical  |  2015  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  commissioning in Q1 2015  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Shandong  |  Pushed backward a year to  |     |     |  Construction completed in H2 2014 with  |  −  |  2015  |  
Mingshui Dahua  |  2015  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  commissioning in Q1 2015  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Jinmei Tianqing  |  Pushed backward a year to  |     |     |  Construction completed in H2 2014 with  |  −  |  2015  |  
2015  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  commissioning in Q1 2015  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Hebei Zhengyuan  |  Pushed backward a year to  |     |     |  Construction completed in H2 2014 with  |  −  |  2015  |  
Chem  |  2015  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  commissioning in H1 2015  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Fengxi Jishan  |  Pushed forward a year to 2015  |     |  Construction expected to be complete in  |  −  |  2015  |  
   |  H1 2015 with commissioning in Jun 2015  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Jiangsu Debang  |  Pushed backward a year to  |     |     |  Further delays to construction schedule  |     |     |     |  −  |  2016  |  
2016  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Inner Mongolia  |  Pushed backward a year to  |     |     |  Further delays  |  to construction schedule  |  −  |  2016  |  
Yitai  |  2016  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  due to tight finance  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Erdos Wulan  |  Pushed backward a year to  |     |     |  Construction expected to be complete in  |  −  |  2016  |  
2016  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Q4 2015 with commissioning in 2016  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Xinjiang  |  Pushed backward a year to  |     |     |  Further delays to construction schedule  |     |     |     |  −  |  2016  |  
Zhongneng  |  2016  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Inner Mongolia  |  Pushed backward a year to  |     |     |  Further delays  |  to construction schedule  |  −  |  2017  |  
Manshi I  |  2017  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  due to tight finance  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Haohua Junhua  |  Downgraded from probable to  |     |  No development for construction  |     |     |     |  ↓  |     |  
speculative  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Diagram 2.3: Chinese production in 2014 (‘000 t) and Y-o-Y Change  |     |  
0  |  1,000  |  2,000  |  3,000  |  4,000  |  5,000  |  6,000  |  7,000  |  8,000  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Shandong  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  18%  |     |     |     |  -5%  |     |     |     |  
Henan  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  -2%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Shanxi  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Hubei  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  -11%  |  -3%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Sichuan  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Anhui  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  7%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Jiangsu  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  -8%  |  -8%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Hebei  |     |     |     |     |     |  -7%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Yunnan  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Guizhou  |     |     |     |     |     |  10%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chongqing  |     |     |     |     |     |  2%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Xinjiang  |     |     |     |     |     |  2%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Shaanxi  |     |     |     |     |     |  29%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Inner Mongolia  |     |     |  -3%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Hunan  |     |     |  -19%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Guangxi  |     |     |  -2%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Liaoning  |     |     |  -6%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Fujian  |     |     |  -7%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Hainan  |     |     |  0%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Ningxia  |     |     |  -32%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Heilongjiang  |     |     |  -6%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Zhejiang  |     |     |  6%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Gansu  |     |     |  -18%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Jilin  |     |     |  -17%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Tianjin  |     |     |  5%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Jiangxi  |     |     |  20%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Guangdong  |     |     |  -54 %  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Qinghai  |     |     |  126%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 2-30  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



  |  The new Yara/BASF plant  |  Yara and BASF announced in February that they are planning to go ahead with  |  
  |  their proposed off-gas ammonia plant in Freeport, Texas. A special focus  |  
  |  expected on-stream in 2019  |  
  |  looking at the investment fundamentals of the plant is included overleaf.  |  
  |     |  
  |  North Dakota tax incentive  |  This is good news for CHS and Northern Plains Nitrogen which are both looking  |  
  |  to build new plants in the state. Since high capital expenditure costs have  |  
  |  bill could provide relief for  |  
  |  weakened the rational for building the plants, the new tax relief bill should  |  
  |  new plants  |  
  |  provide some upside to the feasibility of these projects.  |  
  |     |  



25  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Capacity  |     |  Canada  |     |     |     |     |     |  USA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
15  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2010  |  2011  |  2012  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |     |     |     |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |     |     |  



Supply forecast  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR’14-19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
CRU base case capacity forecast  |  34.6  |  35.1  |  37.8  |  41.7  |  42.9  |  42.9  |  43.6  |  4.5%  |  
Firm  |  0.0  |  0.2  |  1.6  |  3.4  |  3.8  |  3.8  |  3.8  |  76.3%  |  
Probable  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.2  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.7  |  -  |  
Speculative  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.9  |  2.2  |  3.6  |  5.7  |  6.8  |  -  |  
Utilization rate  |  92%  |  92%  |  92%  |  94%  |  95%  |  94%  |  94%  |  0.4%  |  
Production  |  31.9  |  32.4  |  34.6  |  39.1  |  40.7  |  40.2  |  41.1  |  4.9%  |  



Committed New Projects  |  Location  |  Build type  |  Expansion (t/y)  |  Start-up  |  CAPEX $billion  |  
PCS Lima II  |  U.S.A.  |  Debottleneck  |  80  |  2015  |  0.19  |  
CF Donaldsonville II  |  U.S.A.  |  Brownfield  |  1090  |  2015  |  2.1  |  
OCI Iowa  |  U.S.A.  |  Greenfield  |  726  |  2015  |  1.4  |  
Austin Powder  |  U.S.A.  |  Brownfield  |  70  |  2015  |     |  
OCI Beaumont  |  U.S.A.  |  Debottleneck  |  40  |  2015  |     |  
Dyno Nobel Waggaman  |  U.S.A.  |  Greenfield  |  750  |  2016  |  0.85  |  
Simplot Rock Springs  |  U.S.A.  |  Brownfield  |  190  |  2016  |  0.4  |  
Agrium Borger II  |  U.S.A.  |  Brownfield  |  145  |  2016  |  0.7  |  
CF Port Neal II  |  U.S.A.  |  Brownfield  |  726  |  2016  |  1.7  |  
Yara/BASF  |  U.S.A.  |  Greenfield  |  750  |  2019  |  0.6  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-31  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Chapter 2-32  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



  |  IRR  |  40% premium  |     |  30% premium  |     |     |  20% premium  |  
  |  10% premium  |     |  0% premium  |     |     |  IRR  |     |  
  |  20%  |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  18%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  16%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  14%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  12%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  10%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  8%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  6%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  4%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Capex  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  ($ mln)  |  
  |  600  |  650  |  700  |  750  |  800  |  850  |  900  |  950  |  1000  |  
  |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-33  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  Capital budgeting  |     |     |  $0.6bn  |     |  $1.0bn  |  
   |     |     |     |  
   |  Premium above HH  |  %  |  0%  |  20%  |  49%  |  0%  |     |  
   |  NPV  |  $m  |  479  |  135  |  54  |  54  |     |  
   |  IRR  |  %  |  18.5%  |  12.5%  |  10.6%  |  9.8%  |     |  
   |  Payback  |  years  |  7.8  |  8.5  |  10.1  |  13.3  |     |  
   |  Discounted payback  |  years  |  11.4  |  11.8  |  18.6  |  24.8  |     |  



5%  |  10%  |  15%  |  20%  |  25%  |  30%  |  35%  |  40%  |  45%  |  50%  |  55%  |  



Chapter 2-34  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-35  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



  |  Navoiazot has  |  Mitsubishi has won a tender for the construction of a new urea and ammonia plant at  |  
  |  appointed Mitsubishi  |  
  |  Navoiazot’s site in Uzbekistan. The contract and financing of the plant are still under  |  
  |  Heavy Industries as  |  
  |  negotiation and it has not yet been included in the forecast.  |  
  |  lead contractor  |  
  |     |  
  |  Shchekinoazot  |  Ammonia plant included in forecast for the first time on news that preparations for  |  
  |  construction work has commenced and that majority of technology tenders have been  |  
  |     |  completed.  |  



25  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Russia  |     |  Uzbekistan  |     |     |  Turkmenistan  |     |  Belarus  |     |     |  Azerbaijan  |     |     |  Capacity  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
15  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  2010  |  2011  |     |     |  2012  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |     |     |     |  2017  |     |     |  2018  |  2019  |     |     |  



Supply forecast  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR’14-19  |  
CRU base case capacity forecast  |  18.4  |  18.6  |  19.2  |  19.8  |  20.9  |  22.5  |  23.3  |  4.6%  |  
Firm  |  0.0  |  0.2  |  0.8  |  1.4  |  1.8  |  2.1  |  2.5  |  65.4%  |  
Probable  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.7  |  1.9  |  2.4  |  -  |  
Speculative  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.2  |  0.6  |  0.9  |  2.0  |  2.8  |  -  |  
Utilization rate  |  94%  |  94%  |  91%  |  92%  |  91%  |  90%  |  92%  |  -0.4%  |  
Production  |  17.2  |  17.5  |  17.5  |  18.2  |  18.9  |  20.2  |  21.4  |  4.2%  |  



Committed New Projects  |  Location  |  Build type  |  Expansion (kt/y)  |  Start-up  |  CAPEX $ billion  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Acron Novgorod II  |  Russia  |  Brownfield  |  700  |  2015  |  0.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Ammonii Mendeleevsk  |  Russia  |  Greenfield  |  677  |  2016  |  1.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Socar Sumgait  |  Azerbaijan  |  Greenfield  |  406  |  2017  |  -  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Eurochem Kingsiepp  |  Russia  |  Greenfield  |  918  |  2017  |  1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Shchekinoazot Tula  |  Russia  |  Greenfield  |  140  |  2017  |  -  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
EuroChem Nevinnomyssk II  |  Russia  |  Brownfield  |  945  |  2018  |  1.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Garabogaz  |  Turkmenistan  |  Greenfield  |  700  |  2018  |  1.3  |  



Chapter 2-36  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  Committed project  |     |  Non-committed project  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-37  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



14  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Egypt  |     |     |  Libya  |     |     |  Algeria  |     |  Nigeria  |     |  South Africa  |     |  Capacity  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
12  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2010  |  2011  |     |     |     |     |     |  2012  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |  2015  |  2016  |     |  2017  |  2018  |     |     |  2019  |     |  



Supply forecast  |     |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR’14-19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
CRU base case capacity forecast  |  7.6  |  8.0  |  9.0  |  10.4  |  11.5  |  12.4  |  12.6  |  9.6%  |  
Firm  |     |  0.0  |  0.3  |  1.4  |  2.8  |  3.9  |  4.6  |  4.6  |  67.6%  |  
Probable  |     |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.2  |  0.4  |  -  |  
Speculative  |     |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.2  |  1.2  |  2.0  |  -  |  
Utilization rate  |     |  69%  |  57%  |  59%  |  60%  |  63%  |  66%  |  68%  |  3.7%  |  
Production  |     |  5.3  |  4.5  |  5.3  |  6.2  |  7.2  |  8.1  |  8.6  |  13.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Committed New Projects  |  Location  |  Build type  |  Expansion (t/y)  |  Start-up  |  CAPEX $ billion  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Algeria Oman Fertilizer  |  Algeria  |  Greenfield  |  1,320  |  2015  |  2.4  |  
MOPCO Damietta  |  Egypt  |  Brownfield  |  718  |  2015  |  1.05  |  
Indorama Eleme  |  Nigeria  |  Greenfield  |  759  |  2016  |  1.2  |  
Dangote Fertilizer  |  Nigeria  |  Greenfield  |  1,452  |  2017  |  1.9  |  
KIMA Aswan II  |  Egypt  |  Greenfield  |  360  |  2018  |  0.56  |  



Chapter 2-38  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



  |  Work continue at the  |  ...Despite uncertainty tied to corruption scandals and worker strike action at both  |  
  |  two Petrobras  |  
  |  constriction sites.  |  
  |  projects...  |  
  |     |  



16  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  Capacity  |     |  Other  |     |  Argentina  |     |     |  Mexico  |     |  Venezuela  |     |  Brazil  |     |  Trinidad  |  
14  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
12  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



Supply forecast  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR’14-19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
CRU base case capacity forecast  |  11.3  |  12.0  |  12.6  |  13.2  |  14.0  |  14.2  |  14.2  |  3.5%  |  
Firm  |  0.0  |  0.7  |  1.3  |  1.6  |  2.2  |  2.5  |  2.5  |  30.3%  |  
Probable  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.2  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  -  |  
Speculative  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.5  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  -  |  
Utilization rate  |  80%  |  78%  |  74%  |  76%  |  76%  |  77%  |  77%  |  -0.2%  |  
Production  |  9.1  |  9.3  |  9.4  |  10.0  |  10.7  |  10.9  |  11.0  |  3.3%  |  



Committed New Projects  |  Location  |  Build type  |  Expansion (t/y)  |  Start-up  |  CAPEX $ billion  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
YPFB Bulo Bulo  |  Bolivia  |  Greenfield  |  400,000  |  2016  |  0.8  |  
Petrobras Tres Lagoas  |  Brazil  |  Greenfield  |  726,000  |  2016  |  -  |  
Petrobras Uberaba  |  Brazil  |  Greenfield  |  519,000  |  2017  |  1.9  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-39  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



18  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Capacity  |     |  Oman  |     |     |  Qatar  |     |  Iran  |     |  Saudi Arabia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
16  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
14  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
12  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |     |     |  



Supply forecast  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR’14-19  |  
CRU base case capacity forecast  |  17.8  |  18.5  |  18.5  |  18.5  |  19.0  |  19.6  |  19.6  |  1.2%  |  
Firm  |  0.0  |  0.7  |  0.7  |  0.7  |  1.2  |  1.8  |  1.8  |  21.5%  |  
Probable  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  -  |  
Speculative  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.2  |  1.1  |  1.4  |  1.4  |  1.8  |  -  |  
Utilization rate  |  85%  |  79%  |  82%  |  84%  |  85%  |  84%  |  85%  |  1.5%  |  
Production  |  15.2  |  14.6  |  15.2  |  15.5  |  16.1  |  16.5  |  16.7  |  2.7%  |  



Committed New Projects  |  Location  |  Build type  |  Expansion (t/y)  |  Start-up  |  CAPEX $ billion  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Ras Al-Khair  |  Saudi Arabia  |  Greenfield  |  1100  |  2017  |     |  



Chapter 2-40  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



40  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Capacity  |     |     |  Other  |     |  Pakistan  |     |  India  |     |  
35  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
30  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
25  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
15  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



Supply forecast  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR’14-19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
CRU base case capacity forecast  |  11.3  |  12.0  |  12.6  |  13.2  |  14.0  |  14.2  |  14.2  |  3.5%  |  
Firm  |  0.0  |  0.7  |  1.3  |  1.6  |  2.2  |  2.5  |  2.5  |  30.3%  |  
Probable  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.2  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  -  |  
Speculative  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.5  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  -  |  
Utilization rate  |  87%  |  83%  |  82%  |  83%  |  81%  |  81%  |  81%  |  -0.4%  |  
Production  |  9.9  |  10.0  |  10.4  |  10.9  |  11.4  |  11.6  |  11.6  |  3.0%  |  



Committed New Projects  |  Location  |  Build type  |  Expansion (t/y)  |  Start-up  |  CAPEX $ billion  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Matix Panagarh  |  India  |  Greenfield  |  726  |  2015  |  -  |  
Shahjalal Fertilizer  |  Bangladesh  |  Greenfield  |  330  |  2015  |  0.7  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-41  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



  |  Pakistan raises gas prices to urea producers by 60%  |  
  |  Urea, '000t  |  Consumption  |     |  Production  |     |  • Pakistan, unlike its neighbour India, allows its fertilizer  |  
  |  7,000  |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  retailers to sell urea close to market values. The  |  
  |  6,000  |     |     |     |     |     |  country has a more diversified economy than India,  |  
  |  5,000  |     |     |     |     |     |  and fewer workers dependent on agriculture.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  4,000  |     |     |     |     |     |  • However, Pakistan does provide agricultural subsidies.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  The government maintains a support price for wheat  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  3,000  |     |     |     |     |     |  which currently stands at $318/t, around $100/t  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  above the market value for wheat.  |  
  |  2,000  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  1,000  |     |     |     |     |     |  • The government also subsidises fertilizer producers by  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  selling gas to them well below the market rate (based  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |  on subcontinent LNG import prices). The price is also  |  
  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  controlled at around $2.00/MMBtu below the price  |  
  |  paid by other energy intensive industries like cement  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  Data: IFA, NFDC  |     |     |     |     |     |  production.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
•  |  Urea retail prices in Pakistan stand at around  |  kg N/Ha  |     |  Pakistan  |     |     |     |  India  |     |  Bangladesh  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  PKR1940/bag for a 50kg bag. At current exchange  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  rates that is $19/bag or $380/t, around $300/t more  |  200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  than the Indian MRP to farmers on a dollar basis.  |  180  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
•  |  Despite this huge difference in urea prices Pakistani  |  160  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
140  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  farmers actually apply far more nitrogen to their  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  120  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  wheat and rice crop than those in India and  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Bangladesh. This is likely driven by the more  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  commercial nature of Pakistani agriculture.  |  80  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  60  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
•  |  As Pakistani urea producers receive a market rate for  |  40  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  their urea as well as a heavily subsidised gas price,  |  20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  their margins have been strong over the last 10  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  years. However, it now seems the government is  |  2000  |  2002  |  2004  |  2006  |  2008  |  2010  |  2012  |  2014  |  2016  |  2018  |  2020  |     |  
   |  targeting this transfer of government funds to urea  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  producers’ shareholders.  |  Data: FAO  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



  |  Gas price  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  The subsidy’s original purpose was to encourage  |  
  |  $/MMBtu  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  private investment in urea production as in the past  |  
  |  4.50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Pakistan had targeted self-sufficiency in urea.  |     |  
  |  4.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  However, lack of investment in upstream oil and gas  |  
  |  3.50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  and rising political instability limits gas production.  |  
  |  3.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  This led to a gas supply crunch in 2012 reducing urea  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  output and limiting the potential further investment  |  
  |  2.50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  in urea capacity expansions.  |     |     |  
  |  2.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  1.50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  The government has now announced a price hike,  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  raising  |  prices  |  to  |  urea  |  producers  |  from  |  around  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  1.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  $2.50/MMBtu to just under $4.00/MMBtu.  |     |  
  |  0.50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  0.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  It is CRU’s view that this measure is designed to limit  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  economic rents accruing to private investors at the  |  
  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
  |  expense  |  of Pakistan’s tax payers.  |  Prices  |  are still  |  
  |  Data: CRU, government agency  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  ~$2.00/MMBtu below those to the cement industry  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  so further increases could follow.  |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 2-42  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



2008  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



2008  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



14.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
12.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
8.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2008  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



$/MMBtu  |  Anthracite  |  Bituminous  |  
14.00  |     |     |  



12.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
8.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.00  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2008  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



   |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
European hub (gas)  |  6.74  |  9.23  |  9.44  |  10.49  |  8.66  |  7.38  |  7.30  |  7.84  |  8.48  |  9.20  |  
Henry Hub (gas)  |  4.37  |  4.07  |  2.75  |  3.73  |  4.56  |  3.24  |  3.67  |  4.54  |  4.62  |  4.69  |  
Waidhaus (Russian gas)  |  8.22  |  10.60  |  11.98  |  11.83  |  10.70  |  7.32  |  7.54  |  9.08  |  10.03  |  10.71  |  
Chinese anthracite coal  |  6.25  |  8.56  |  8.03  |  7.10  |  5.92  |  5.60  |  5.64  |  5.85  |  6.08  |  6.28  |  
Chinese thermal coal  |  5.34  |  6.10  |  5.42  |  4.61  |  3.94  |  3.66  |  3.55  |  3.80  |  4.26  |  4.50  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-43  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Oil Rigs  |  Gas Rigs  |  Gas prodcution Bcf/d  |  
1800  |     |  45.0  |  
1600  |     |  40.0  |  
1400  |     |  35.0  |  
1200  |     |  30.0  |  
1000  |     |  25.0  |  
800  |     |  20.0  |  
600  |     |  15.0  |  
400  |     |  10.0  |  
200  |     |  5.0  |  
0  |     |  0.0  |  
Jan-08 May-08 Sep-08 Jan-09 May-09 Sep-09 Jan-10  |  May-10 Sep-10 Jan-11 May-11 Sep-11  |  Jan-12 May-12 Sep-12 Jan-13 May-13 Sep-13 Jan-14 May-14 Sep-14 Jan-15  |  



Chapter 2-44  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-45  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Diagram 2.6: European contract gas lags oil by 6-9 months  |     |     |  
Oil ($/bbl)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Gas ($/MMBtu)  |  
140  |     |  Brent, 6-month lagged  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  18.00  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  16.00  |  
120  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Russian gas contract  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  14.00  |  
100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Forecast contract price  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  12.00  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
80  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  10.00  |  
60  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  8.00  |  
40  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  6.00  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  4.00  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2.00  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.00  |  
Jan-88  |  Jan-90  |  Jan-92  |  Jan-94  |  Jan-96  |  Jan-98  |  Jan-00  |  Jan-02  |  Jan-04  |  Jan-06  |  Jan-08  |  Jan-10  |  Jan-12  |  Jan-14  |  Jan-16  |  
Diagram 2.7: Above trend European gas storage is weighing on prices  |  
   |     |  European Storage (RHS)  |     |     |  Zeebrugge  |     |     |  Brent crude  |  
25$/MMBtu  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  MMcm  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  90  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  80  |  
20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  70  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
15  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  60  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  50  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  40  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  30  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  20  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  10  |  
0  |     |     |  Apr-11  |     |     |     |     |     |  Apr-13 Jul-13  |     |  Jan-14 Apr-14  |     |     |  0  |  
Jan-10 Apr-10  |  Jul-10  |  Oct-10 Jan-11  |  Jul-11 Oct-11  |  Jan-12  |  Apr-12  |  Jul-12 Oct-12  |  Jan-13  |  Oct-13  |  Jul-14  |  Oct-14  |  Jan-15  |  



Chapter 2-46  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



$/tonne  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
450  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
400  |     |     |  Cost to CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  400  |  
   |     |  Cost to FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
350  |     |     |  Site Costs  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
250  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
150  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |  5,000  |     |     |  10,000  |     |     |  15,000  |     |  
   |     |  Saudi Arabia  |  Iran  |  Libya  |  Russia  |  Egypt Argentina Canada  |     |  Trinidad & Tobago  |  Netherlands  |  Australia  |     |  Ukraine  |  
Algeria  |  Venezuela  |  Oman Qatar  |  Malaysia  |  Poland  |  Indonesia  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-47  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



$/tonne  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
400  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  400  |  
350  |  Site Costs  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
250  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
150  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |  20,000  |  40,000  |  60,000  |  80,000  |  100,000  |  120,000  |  140,000  |  160,000  |  180,000  |  



Venezuela Other FSU Russia  |  N. America  |  India  |  China (anthracite)  |  W. Europe  |  Ukraine  |  
Middle east  |  Africa  |     |  China (bituminous)  |  C. Europe  |  Indonesia  |  
Other South Asia  |  Other S.E Asia & Oceania  |  China (natural gas)  |  
   |     |  Other L. America  |  China (powder & mixed)  |     |  



Chapter 2-48  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Plant  |  Country  |  ‘000t/y  |  Build Type  |  CAPEX $ bn  |  CAPEX $/t ammonia  |  
2015  |     |  8,035  |     |     |     |  
Algeria Oman Fertilizer  |  Algeria  |  1,320  |  Greenfield  |  2.4  |  1818  |  
Matix Panagarh  |  India  |  726  |  Greenfield  |  1.1  |  1515  |  
PCS Lima II  |  U.S.A.  |  80  |  Debottleneck  |  0.19  |  2375  |  
MOPCO Dami.  |  Egypt  |  718  |  Brownfield  |  1.05  |  1462  |  
PT Pupuk Kaltim V  |  Indonesia  |  825  |  Brownfield  |  1  |  1212  |  
Acron Novgorod II  |  Russia  |  700  |  Brownfield  |  0.41  |  586  |  
Shahjalal Fertilizer  |  Bangladesh  |  330  |  Greenfield  |  0.7  |  2121  |  
PT Panca Amara Utama  |  Indonesia  |  660  |  Greenfield  |     |     |  
Dyno Nobel Waggaman  |  U.S.A.  |  750  |  Greenfield  |  0.85  |  1133  |  
CF Donaldsonville II  |  U.S.A.  |  1090  |  Brownfield  |  2.1  |  1927  |  
OCI Iowa  |  U.S.A.  |  726  |  Greenfield  |  1.4  |  1928  |  
Austin Powder  |  U.S.A.  |  70  |  Brownfield  |     |     |  
OCI Beaumont  |  U.S.A.  |  40  |  Debottleneck  |     |     |  
2016  |     |  5,100  |     |     |     |  
YPFB Bulo Bulo  |  Bolivia  |  400  |  Greenfield  |  0.8  |  2100  |  
Simplot Rock Springs  |  U.S.A.  |  190  |  Brownfield  |  0.4  |     |  
Ammonii Mendeleevsk  |  Russia  |  677  |  Greenfield  |  1.6  |  2363  |  
Petrobras Tres Lagoas  |  Brazil  |  726  |  Greenfield  |     |     |  
Petronas Sipitang  |  Malaysia  |  735  |  Greenfield  |  1.4  |     |  
PT Pupuk Sriwidjaja Palembang  |  Indonesia  |  660  |  Brownfield  |  0.6  |  850  |  
Agrium Borger II  |  U.S.A.  |  145  |  Debottleneck  |  0.7  |  4966  |  
Indorama Eleme  |  Nigeria  |  759  |  Greenfield  |  1.2  |  1581  |  
CF Port Neal II  |  U.S.A.  |  726  |  Brownfield  |  1.7  |  2342  |  
Koch Brandon  |  Canada  |  81.63  |  Debottleneck  |  0.0  |  368  |  
2017  |     |  4,395  |     |     |     |  
Socar Sumgait  |  Azerbaijan  |  406  |  Greenfield  |     |     |  
Petrobras Uberaba  |  Brazil  |  519  |  Greenfield  |     |     |  
Dangote Fert.  |  Nigeria  |  1,452  |  Greenfield  |  1.9  |  1309  |  
Ras Al-Khair  |  Saudi Arabia  |  1,100  |  Greenfield  |     |     |  
Eurochem Kingsiepp  |  Russia  |  918  |  Greenfield  |  1  |  1089  |  
Shchekinoazot  |  Russia  |  100  |  Greenfield  |     |     |  
2018  |     |  2,005  |     |     |     |  
KIMA Aswan II  |  Egypt  |  360  |  Greenfield  |  0.56  |  1556  |  
EuroChem Nevinnomyssk II  |  Russia  |  945  |  Brownfield  |  1.5  |  1587  |  
Turkmenistan Garabogaz  |  Turkmenistan  |  700  |  Greenfield  |  1.3  |  1857  |  
2019  |     |     |     |     |     |  
Yara/BASF Freeport  |  U.S.A.  |  750  |  Greenfield  |  0.8  |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 2-49  |  



   |     |     |     |     |  On  |     |     |  
   |  Plant  |  Location  |  000 t/y  |  Build Type  |  stream  |  Feedstock  |     |  
   |  Jincheng Anthracite (Henan)  |  Qinyang, Jiaozuo,  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Tianqing Coal Chemical Co Ltd  |  Henan  |  180  |  Greenfield  |  2015  |  anthracite  |     |  
   |  Hebei Yangmei Zhengyuan  |     |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  Chemical Group II  |  Cangzhou, Hebei  |  450  |  Greenfield  |  2015  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |  Xinjiang Zhongneng Wanyuan  |     |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  Chemical Ltd  |  Manas, Xinjiang  |  400  |  Greenfield  |  2016  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |     |  Erdos City, Inner  |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  Erdos Yiding Coal Chemical Ltd  |  Mongolia  |  300  |  Greenfield  |  2015  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  coke oven  |     |  
   |  CNSG Kunshan Co.  |  Kunshan, Jiangsu  |  260  |  Greenfield  |  2015  |  gas  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  coke oven  |     |  
   |  Shanxi Huaxin Fertilizer Co. Ltd  |  Jiaocheng, Shanxi  |  180  |  Greenfield  |  2015  |  gas  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  Xinjiang XLX Energy Chemical Co  |  Manas, Xinjiang  |  280  |  Greenfield  |  2015  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |  CNSG Debang (Jiangsu) Chemical  |  Lianyungang, Jiangsu  |  350  |  Greenfield  |  2016  |  coal  |     |  
   |  Wulan Coal Group Erdos I  |  Erdos, Inner Mongolia  |  700  |  Greenfield  |  2016  |  coal  |     |  
   |     |  Yunlian County, Yibin  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Xinli Chemical Co. Yunlian County  |  city, Sichuan  |  300  |  Greenfield  |  2016  |  coal  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  coke oven  |     |  
   |  Sichuan Leshan Jinrui Chemical  |  Leshan, Sichuan  |  65  |  Greenfield  |  2015  |  gas  |     |  
   |  ChinaCoal Pingshuo Group  |  Pingshuo, Shanxi  |  300  |  Greenfield  |  2016  |  coal  |     |  
   |  Shanxi Yu County Chemical  |  Yangquan, Shanxi  |  240  |  Expansion  |  2015  |  anthracite  |     |  
   |  Hebei Dongguang Chemical Co  |  Dongguang County,  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Expansion  |  Hebei  |  400  |  Brownfield  |  2016  |  coal  |     |  
   |  Hengde Chemical Co Jining  |  Jining, Shandong  |  300  |  Greenfield  |  2016  |  coal  |     |  
   |     |  Xing'anmeng, Inner  |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  Inner Mongolia Berun Chemical  |  Mongolia  |  300  |  Greenfield  |  2016  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  coke oven  |     |  
   |  Shanxi Fengxi Jishan  |  Jishan County, Shanxi  |  300  |  Greenfield  |  2015  |  gas  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  China BlueChemical Hegang  |  Hegang, Heilongjiang  |  300  |  Greenfield  |  2015  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |     |  Nanzhang County,  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Sichuan Longmang Group  |  Xiangyang City, Hubei  |  250  |  Greenfield  |  2018  |  coal  |     |  
   |     |  Tuke Industrial Park,  |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  ChinaCoal Erdos II  |  Erdos, Inner Mongolia  |  1000  |  Brownfield  |  2017  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  acetylene tail  |     |  
   |  Qinghai Salt Lake Industry II  |  Qinghai  |  245  |  Brownfield  |  2015  |  gas  |     |  
   |  Shandong Mingshui Chemical (III)  |  Zhangqiu, Shandong  |  300  |  Brownfield  |  2015  |  anthracite  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  Shandong Ruixing Chem I  |  Dongping, Shandong  |  500  |  Brownfield  |  2016  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  coke oven  |     |  
   |  Shaanxi Heimao Coking Co., Ltd  |  Hancheng, Shaanxi  |  280  |  Greenfield  |  2016  |  gas  |     |  
   |  Shanxi Tianze Coal & Chem Shanxi I  |  Shanxi  |  400  |  Brownfield  |  2015  |  anthracite  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  Jiangsu Linggu I  |  Linggu, Jiangsu  |  450  |  Brownfield  |  2015  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  Shandong Luxi Chemical I  |  Liaocheng, Shandong  |  500  |  Brownfield  |  2016  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |     |  Erdos City, Inner  |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  Erdos Yiding Coal Chemical II  |  Mongolia  |  300  |  Brownfield  |  2016  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |  Inner Mongolia Manshi Energy Co.  |  Ordos, Inner  |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  I  |  Mongolia  |  900  |  Greenfield  |  2017  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  sub-  |     |  
   |  Inner Mongolia Yitai Chemical  |  Inner Mongolia  |  600  |  Greenfield  |  2016  |  bituminous  |     |  
   |  Sinofert Jilin Changshan  |  Jilin  |  180  |  Brownfield  |  2015  |  lignite  |     |  
   |  Total Capacity Added**  |     |  11,510  |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 2-50  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR 2014 -19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
North America  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  0.9  |  0.9  |  -2.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Central & South America  |  5.1  |  5.0  |  5.0  |  5.0  |  5.0  |  5.0  |  -0.4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Europe  |  2.1  |  2.3  |  2.4  |  2.4  |  2.4  |  2.3  |  1.7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
CIS  |  3.6  |  4.0  |  4.4  |  4.6  |  5.1  |  5.0  |  6.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Africa  |  0.9  |  1.1  |  1.2  |  1.1  |  1.3  |  1.5  |  10.4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Middle East  |  3.3  |  2.7  |  2.2  |  2.5  |  2.7  |  2.7  |  -3.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South Asia  |  0.0  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  10.9%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
East Asia  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South-east Asia + Oceania  |  2.0  |  1.7  |  1.8  |  1.8  |  1.6  |  1.6  |  -4.4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
World Total  |  18.1  |  18.0  |  18.1  |  18.4  |  19.1  |  19.0  |  1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR 2014 -19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
North America  |  5.0  |  4.5  |  4.3  |  4.5  |  4.9  |  4.6  |  -1.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Central & South America  |  0.9  |  0.9  |  1.2  |  1.0  |  0.9  |  0.9  |  0.4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Europe  |  4.7  |  4.7  |  4.7  |  4.8  |  4.8  |  4.9  |  0.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
CIS  |  0.0  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  4.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Africa  |  1.2  |  1.4  |  1.3  |  1.5  |  1.6  |  1.7  |  6.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Middle East  |  1.1  |  1.1  |  1.1  |  1.1  |  1.1  |  1.1  |  -0.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South Asia  |  1.8  |  1.9  |  1.9  |  2.0  |  2.0  |  2.0  |  1.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
East Asia  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.4  |  2.4  |  1.4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South-east Asia + Oceania  |  1.0  |  1.2  |  1.2  |  1.3  |  1.4  |  1.5  |  7.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
World Total  |  18.1  |  18.0  |  18.2  |  18.5  |  19.1  |  19.1  |  1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 3-51  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Diagram 3.1: United States Imports, 2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Year to December imports (% of total 2014 forecast)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  = Major Exporters  |     |  = Total Imports  |     |     |  
   |  0%  |  20%  |     |     |  40%  |     |  60%  |     |  80%  |     |     |  100%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  917  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Canada  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  205  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Russia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  5034  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  136  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  United States  |  Trinidad  |     |     |     |     |     |  Ukraine  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  & Tobago  |     |     |     |     |     |  80  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  6  |  3358  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Saudi  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  294  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Arabia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  Colombia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  Venezuela  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  Monthly Imports  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Cumulative Monthly Imports  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Range 2009 - 2013  |     |     |  4-yr average  |     |     |     |     |     |  2010  |     |     |     |     |  2011  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |     |     |     |     |  2012  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  
   |  0.80  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  8.0  |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |  
Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.70  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  7.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.60  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  6.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  5.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.40  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  4.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.30  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  3.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.00  |  Feb Mar  |     |     |     |     |     |  Sep  |     |     |     |     |  0.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Jan  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |     |  Jan  |  Feb  |  Mar  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Sep  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |  
Data: CRU, GTIS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 3-52  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR 2014 -19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Imports  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
USA  |  5.0  |  4.4  |  4.3  |  4.5  |  4.9  |  4.6  |  -1.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Exports  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Canada  |  0.9  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  0.9%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU, GTIS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Diagram 3.2: India Imports, 2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Year to December imports (% of total 2014 forecast)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  = Major Exporters  |     |  = Total Imports  |     |     |  
   |  0%  |     |  20%  |     |     |  40%  |     |     |  60%  |     |  80%  |     |  100%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  48  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Ukraine  |     |     |     |  Russia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  368  |     |     |  271  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Iran  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Qatar  |     |     |  703  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  35  |     |  2036  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Egypt  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  India  |     |     |  16  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Indonesia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  560  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Saudi Arabia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  Monthly Imports  |     |     |     |     |     |  Cumulative Monthly Imports  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Range 2009 - 2013  |     |     |  4-yr average  |     |     |     |     |  2010  |     |     |     |     |  2011  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |     |     |     |  2012  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  
   |  0.35  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2.5  |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |  
Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.30  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.25  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.15  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.05  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.00  |  Feb  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Sep  |     |     |     |  0.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Jan  |  Mar  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |  Jan  |  Feb  |  Mar  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Sep  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |  
Data: CRU, GTIS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 3-53  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR 2014 -19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India  |  1.8  |  1.9  |  1.9  |  2.0  |  2.0  |  2.0  |  1.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Diagram 3.3: South Korea Imports, 2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Year to December imports (% of total 2014 forecast)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  = Major Exporters  |     |  = Total Imports  |     |     |  
   |  0%  |     |  20%  |     |     |  40%  |     |     |  60%  |     |  80%  |     |     |  100%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  11  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Russia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  Trinidad  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1163  |  South  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  & Tobago  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Korea  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  33  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  104  |  124  |  Indonesia  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Malaysia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  494  |     |     |  319  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Saudi  |     |  Australia  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  18  |  Arabia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Bahrain  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  Monthly Imports  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Cumulative Monthly Imports  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Range 2009 - 2013  |     |     |  4-yr average  |     |     |     |     |     |  2010  |     |     |     |     |  2011  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |     |     |     |     |  2012  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  
   |  0.16  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.4  |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |  
Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.14  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.12  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.08  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.06  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.04  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.02  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.00  |  Feb  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Sep  |     |     |     |     |  0.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Jan  |  Mar  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |     |  Jan  |  Feb  |  Mar  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Sep  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |  
Data: CRU, GTIS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chapter 3-54  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR 2014 -19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Japan  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  1.7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South Korea  |  1.2  |  1.2  |  1.2  |  1.2  |  1.2  |  1.2  |  0.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Taiwan  |  0.6  |  0.6  |  0.6  |  0.7  |  0.7  |  0.7  |  4.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Total  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.4  |  2.4  |  1.4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Diagram 3.4: Indonesia Exports, Year-to-August 2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Year to August 2014 Exports (% of 2014 total…  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  = Total Exports  |     |  = Major Import Markets  |     |  
0%  |  20%  |     |  40%  |  60%  |     |  80%  |     |     |  100%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  73  |     |  105  |  172  |  Japan  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  China  |     |  126  |  South Korea  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Taiwan  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  44  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  42  |     |     |  571  |     |  Vietnam  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Thailand  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Indonesia  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  7  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Malaysia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  Monthly Exports  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Cumulative Monthly Exports  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Range 2009 - 2013  |     |     |  4-yr average  |     |     |     |     |     |  2010  |     |     |     |     |  2011  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |     |     |     |     |  2012  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  
   |  0.25  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.4  |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |  
Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.15  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.05  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.00  |  Feb Mar  |     |     |     |     |  Sep  |     |     |     |     |  0.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Jan  |  Apr  |  May Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |     |  Jan  |  Feb  |  Mar  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Sep  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |  
Confidential  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Chapter 3-55  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR 2014 -19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Indonesia  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Philippines  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Thailand  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  3.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vietnam  |  0.2  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.5  |  26.3%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Australia  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Total  |  1.0  |  1.2  |  1.2  |  1.3  |  1.3  |  1.4  |  7.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 3-56  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Diagram 3.5: Iran Exports, 2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Year to December 2014 Exports (% of 2014 total forecast)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  = Total Exports  |     |  = Major Importer  |     |     |     |  
0%  |  20%  |  40%  |  60%  |     |     |  80%  |     |  100%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  7  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Turkey  |  597  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Iran  |  590  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  India  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  Monthly Exports  |     |     |     |     |     |  Cumulative Monthly Exports  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Range 2009 - 2013  |     |     |  4-yr average  |     |     |     |     |  2010  |     |     |     |     |  2011  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |     |     |     |  2012  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  
   |  0.20  |     |     |     |     |     |  1.2  |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |  
Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.18  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.16  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.14  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.12  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.08  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.06  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.04  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.02  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.00  |  Feb Mar  |     |     |     |     |  Sep  |     |     |     |  0.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Jan  |  Apr  |  May Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |  Jan  |  Feb  |  Mar  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Sep  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 3-57  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR 2014 -19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bahrain  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Oman  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  -2.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Qatar  |  0.6  |  0.6  |  0.6  |  0.6  |  0.6  |  0.5  |  -0.9%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Saudi Arabia  |  1.4  |  0.7  |  0.5  |  0.8  |  1.2  |  1.3  |  -2.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Turkey  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UAE  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  -8.4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Other  |  0.6  |  0.8  |  0.5  |  0.5  |  0.4  |  0.3  |  -12.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Total  |  3.3  |  2.7  |  2.2  |  2.5  |  2.7  |  2.7  |  -3.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Diagram 3.6: Ukraine Exports, 2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Year to December Exports (% of total 2014 forecast)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  = Total Exports  |     |  = Major Importer  |     |     |     |  
0%  |  20%  |     |  40%  |  60%  |     |  80%  |  100%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  697  |  Ukraine  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  159  |     |     |     |  France  |  48  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  USA  |     |     |     |  Spain  |  57  |     |  171  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  Morocco  |  68  |     |  Turkey  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  Monthly Exports  |     |     |     |     |     |  Cumulative Monthly Exports  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Range 2009 - 2013  |     |     |  4-yr average  |     |     |     |  2010  |     |     |  2011  |     |     |     |  2012  |     |  
   |  0.20  |  2014  |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |  1.4  |     |  2013  |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |     |  
Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.18  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.16  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.14  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.12  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.08  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.06  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.04  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.02  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.00  |  Feb Mar  |     |     |     |     |  Sep  |     |     |     |  0.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Jan  |  Apr  |  May Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |  Jan  |  Feb  |  Mar  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Sep  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |  



Chapter 3-58  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR 2014 -19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Ukraine  |  0.7  |  0.9  |  0.9  |  0.8  |  0.9  |  0.8  |  4.4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Germany  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Netherlands  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.5  |  0.4  |  0.3  |  -3.7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Other  |  0.7  |  0.7  |  0.8  |  0.7  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  2.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Total  |  2.1  |  2.3  |  2.4  |  2.4  |  2.4  |  2.3  |  1.7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Diagram 3.7: Russia Exports, 2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Year to December Exports (% of total 2014 forecast)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  = Total Exports  |     |  = Major Importers  |     |     |  
   |  0%  |  20%  |     |     |  40%  |     |     |  60%  |     |  80%  |     |  100%  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Norway  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  29  |  Finland  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Sweden  |  269  |  213  |     |     |  3635  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  302  |  176  |  Lithuania  |     |  Russia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Belgium  |  2534  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Ukraine  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  Monthly Exports  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Cumulative Monthly Exports  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Range 2009 - 2013  |     |     |  4-yr average  |     |     |     |     |     |  2010  |     |     |     |     |  2011  |     |     |     |  
   |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |     |     |     |     |  2012  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  
   |  0.70  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  4.0  |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |  2014 forecast  |     |  
Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Millions  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.60  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  3.5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  3.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.50  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2.5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.40  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.30  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  0.5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0.00  |  Feb  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Sep  |     |     |     |     |  0.0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Jan  |  Mar  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |     |  Jan  |  Feb  |  Mar  |  Apr  |  May  |  Jun  |  Jul  |  Aug  |  Sep  |  Oct  |  Nov  |  Dec  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 3-59  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  CAGR 2014 -19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Russia  |  3.4  |  3.6  |  4.1  |  4.3  |  4.5  |  4.9  |  7.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



  |  Diagram 3.8: Ammonia Price Construction: Key Drivers  |     |  
  |  Coal/naphtha prices  |  Commissioning of new  |     |     |  
  |     |  Competition for  |  projects  |  Other fertilizer prices  |     |  
  |     |  Plant closures  |     |  
  |     |  natural gas  |  CPL/other chemicals  |     |  
  |     |     |  Merchant supply  |     |  
  |     |  Oil markets  |  prices  |     |  
  |     |  Gas prices  |  availability  |  Phosphate & NPK prices  |     |  
  |     |  Domestic production  |     |  
  |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |  Urea and Nitrate prices  |     |  
  |  Cost of construction of  |  Import demand  |     |  
  |     |     |  
  |     |  a new plant  |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |  
  |  Raw Materials  |  Supply/Demand  |  End Product Prices  |     |  
  |  Balance  |     |  
  |  (determine the  |  (determine the  |     |  
  |  (determines the  |     |  
  |     |  floor price)  |  ceiling price)  |     |  
  |     |  direction of price)  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |  PRICE  |     |     |  
  |     |     |  of  |     |     |  
  |     |     |  AMMONIA  |     |     |  
  |  Seasonality  |  Freight / Logistics  |  Agricultural  |  Governmental  |  Risks &  |  
  |  Markets  |  Intervention  |  Force majeure  |  
  |     |     |  
  |  Direct Application  |  Shipping rates  |  Agricultural  |  Trade bans / barriers  |  Weather conditions  |  
  |     |  Shipping capacity  |  commodities prices  |  Export / import duties  |     |  
  |  Fertilizer application  |  Biofuel prices  |  Force majeure in  |  
  |  impacts downstream  |  Inland logistics tariffs  |  Subsidy programs  |  ammonia/gas industry  |  
  |  ammonia requirements  |  Crop planting and  |  Traders’ speculations  |  
  |     |     |  (biofuels, agri,  |  
  |     |     |  fertilizer demand  |  fertilizers)  |  Currency exchange rates  |  
  |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 3-60  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |     |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |   2014-  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  19  |  
Crop prices  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Corn  |  $/t  |  259  |  201  |  190  |  199  |  202  |  206  |  208  |  3%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Wheat  |  $/t  |  312  |  282  |  261  |  266  |  266  |  267  |  265  |  -6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Soybean  |  $/t  |  538  |  494  |  461  |  458  |  461  |  466  |  466  |  -6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Rice  |  $/t  |  473  |  408  |  385  |  387  |  389  |  391  |  398  |  -2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Oil prices  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brent  |  $/bbl  |  109  |  99  |  61  |  82  |  93  |  101  |  108  |  9%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Gas prices  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
TTF (NW Europe spot)  |  $/MMBtu  |  10.49  |  8.66  |  7.38  |  7.30  |  7.84  |  8.48  |  9.20  |  6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Henry Hub (US spot)  |  $/MMBtu  |  3.72  |  4.56  |  3.24  |  3.67  |  4.54  |  4.62  |  4.69  |  3%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Russian contract (Germany)  |  $/MMBtu  |  10.80  |  10.70  |  7.32  |  7.54  |  9.08  |  10.03  |  10.71  |  0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Ukraine (DAF)  |  $/MMBtu  |  9.93  |  9.71  |  9.28  |  5.80  |  7.81  |  8.97  |  9.71  |  0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Coal prices  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
fob Newcastle (6000kcal/kg)  |  $/MMBtu  |  3.42  |  2.94  |  2.74  |  2.66  |  2.85  |  3.20  |  3.37  |  15%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chinese anthracite  |  $/MMBtu  |  6.73  |  5.92  |  5.60  |  5.64  |  5.85  |  6.08  |  6.28  |  6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chinese powder coal  |  $/MMBtu  |  4.90  |  4.21  |  3.88  |  3.79  |  4.02  |  4.44  |  4.67  |  11%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chinese bituminous  |  $/MMBtu  |  4.37  |  3.94  |  3.66  |  3.55  |  3.80  |  4.26  |  4.50  |  14%  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 3-61  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Urea and Ammonia Pricing  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |  Urea  |     |     |     |  Ammonia  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1988  |  1990  |  1992  |  1994  |  1996  |  1998  |  2000  |  2002  |  2004  |  2006  |  2008  |  2010  |  2012  |  2014  |  
Data: CRU  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 3-62  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Diagram 3.9: Demand-side price driver analysis  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  Corn  |     |     |     |  DAP  |     |     |  Ammonia  |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1988  |  1990  |  1992  |  1994  |  1996  |  1998  |  2000  |  2002  |  2004  |  2006  |  2008  |  2010  |  2012  |  2014  |  
Diagram 3.10: Supply-side price driver analysis  |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |  Oil  |     |     |  Contract gas  |     |     |     |  Ammonia  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1988  |  1990  |  1992  |  1994  |  1996  |  1998  |  2000  |  2002  |  2004  |  2006  |  2008  |  2010  |  2012  |  2014  |  
Data: CRU, EIA, IMF  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 3-63  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



2000  |  2002  |  2004  |  2006  |  2008  |  



2010  |  2012  |  2014  |  2016  |  2018  |  



  |     |     |     |  Monthly ammonia  |     |     |  •  |  We have used our statistical model to provide an  |  
  |  $/t  |     |     |  Annualised ammonia model  |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |  annual forecast of implied ammonia prices at FOB  |  
  |  1000  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Middle East, based solely upon our four selected  |  
  |  900  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  fundamentals.  |     |     |     |  
  |  800  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  As can be seen, the short-term trend looks very  |  
  |  700  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  600  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  negative given the collapse in urea, oil and DAP  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  pricing. The  |  flat outlook for corn provides little  |  
  |  500  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  support and we are expecting prices to remain  |  
  |  400  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  under downwards pressure for at least the next  |  
  |  300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  two years.  |     |     |     |     |  
  |  200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  However, these simple regression-based forecasts  |  
  |  100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  relying  |  on  |  other,  |  underlying  |  prices  |  ignores  |  
  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  structural ammonia market conditions. In 2013  |  
  |  2000  |  2002  |  2004  |  2006  |  2008  |  2010  |  2012  |  2014  |  2016  |  2018  |  
  |  and 2014 market tightness forced ammonia prices  |  
  |  Data: CRU  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  above  |  their  |  urea  |  trend. While  |  pricing  |  below  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  $380/t ignores short-run marginal costs.  |     |  



Chapter 3-64  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  ∆%  |  
   |  2014-19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Gas price ($/MMBtu)  |  7.60  |  8.80  |  5.80  |  7.81  |  8.92  |  9.70  |  28%  |  
Gas cost  |  289  |  334  |  221  |  297  |  339  |  369  |  28%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Non-gas variable costs  |  13  |  9  |  10  |  10  |  11  |  11  |  -15%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Maintenance/sustaining capital  |  14  |  13  |  14  |  14  |  14  |  14  |  0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Overhead (SGAs and working capital)  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  20%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Ammonia Cash Cost  |  322  |  362  |  250  |  327  |  371  |  400  |  25%  |  
Freight  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Port Charges  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Cost at fob  |  348  |  388  |  276  |  354  |  397  |  427  |  23%  |  
Data: CRU  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 3-65  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



$/t  |     |  Ukrainian export floor  |     |  Fundamentals-driven forecast  |  
   |     |  



2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



   |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  ∆%  |  
   |  2012-19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Urea, FOB Black Sea  |  100  |  84  |  78  |  70  |  68  |  75  |  82  |  87  |  -13%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
DAP, FOB Tampa  |  100  |  83  |  88  |  87  |  79  |  77  |  80  |  83  |  -17%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Corn, FOB US Gulf Coast  |  100  |  87  |  67  |  64  |  67  |  68  |  69  |  70  |  -30%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Crude Oil, Brent  |  100  |  97  |  89  |  55  |  74  |  84  |  91  |  96  |  -4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Chapter 3-66  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 3-67  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



$/t  |  Historical Ammonia  |  'Fitted' ammonia forecast  |  
600  |     |     |  



2000  |  2001  |  2002  |  2003  |  2004  |  2005  |  2006  |  2007  |  2008  |  2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



$/t  |  Historical Ammonia  |  Forecast Ammonia  |  
600  |     |     |  



2009  |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  



Chapter 3-68  |  Confidential  |  



   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  CAGR  |  
   |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  ∆ 2014-19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Black Sea  |  546  |  476  |  492  |  403  |  387  |  406  |  434  |  460  |  -7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Middle East  |  572  |  500  |  519  |  425  |  410  |  429  |  457  |  483  |  -7%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Caribbean  |  564  |  509  |  498  |  409  |  397  |  421  |  449  |  475  |  -5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Tampa  |  605  |  541  |  545  |  457  |  443  |  463  |  491  |  518  |  -5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India  |  571  |  550  |  539  |  451  |  436  |  456  |  485  |  512  |  -5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Far East  |  621  |  581  |  563  |  475  |  461  |  482  |  511  |  538  |  -4%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Chapter 3-69  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Chapter 3-70  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix A-71  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |     |  25  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  production)  |  24  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  23  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  22  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  per tonne agriculutal  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Intensity of use  |  21  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
19  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
18  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
17  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  nutrient  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  16  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  5-year average  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  (kg  |  15  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  1973  |  1975  |  1977  |  1979  |  1981  |  1983  |  1985  |  1987  |  1989  |  1991  |  1993  |  1995  |  1997  |  1999  |  2001  |  2003  |  2005  |  2007  |  2009  |  2011  |  2013  |  



Appendix A-72  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  Consumption growth  |  2038 forecast  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Nitrogen  |  P&K;  |  Difference  |  N Consumption*  |  N:PK ratio  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
+1.64%  |  +1.64%  |  +0.00% (high case)  |  173.8  |  1.44:1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
+1.24%  |  +2.16%  |  -0.92% (base case)  |  160.8  |  1.20:1  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Note: assumes constant P2O5:K2O ratio  |     |     |  * million tonnes  |  



   |     |     |     |  Nitrogen demand  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Urea demand (actual)  |     |  
   |  180  |     |     |  Urea demand (forecast)  |     |     |     |     |     |  Urea share of N demand  |  75%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  160  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  70%  |  
N  |  140  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  65%  |  
120  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  60%  |  
tonnes  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  55%  |  
80  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  50%  |  
million  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
60  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  45%  |  
40  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  40%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  35%  |  
   |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  30%  |  
   |  1994  |  1996  |  1998  |  2000  |  2002  |  2004  |  2006  |  2008  |  2010  |  2012  |  2014  |  2016  |  2018  |  2020  |  2022  |  2024  |  2026  |  2028  |  2030  |  2032  |  2034  |  2036  |  2038  |  
Confidential  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Appendix A-73  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



  |     |  260  |  
  |     |  240  |  
  |  product  |  220  |  
  |  200  |  
  |  180  |  
  |  tonnes  |  160  |  
  |  140  |  
  |  million  |  
  |  120  |  
  |  100  |  
  |     |  
  |     |  80  |  
  |     |  60  |  



Fertilizer (history)  |  Fertilizer (forecast)  |  Technical (history)  |  Technical (forecast)  |  



Appendix A-74  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



per capita, 2007  |  kcal)  |  
consumption  |  (million  |  
Food  |     |  



1.4  |     |  Food consumption per capita  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
1.3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1.2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1.1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1  |     |     |     |  ...but does not keep pace  |     |  
   |     |     |  with income as populations  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
0.9  |     |     |     |  become wealthier and the  |     |  
0.8  |  Calorific intake increases rapidly with  |  proportion of income spent  |     |  
income in developing countries...  |     |  on food falls.  |     |     |  
0.7  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0.6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |  10  |  20  |  30  |  40  |  50  |  60  |  



GDP per capita, 2007 ($2005)  |  Data: FAO, CRU  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix A-75  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |     |  10,000  |     |     |     |  Forecast of food consumption  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Low income countries  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Food consumption  |     |  8,000  |  Middle income countries  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  High income countries  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
(trillion kcal)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6,000  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4,000  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  2,000  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  1963  |  1967  |  1971  |  1975  |  1979  |  1983  |  1987  |  1991  |  1995  |  1999  |  2003  |  2007  |  2011  |  2015  |  2019  |  2023  |  2027  |  2031  |  2035  |  2039  |  



Appendix A-76  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix A-77  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



  |     |  300  |     |  Wheat  |  Indexes of crop yields since 1961  |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |  Corn  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  100)  |  250  |     |  Rice  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |  Soyabeans  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  =  |     |     |  Fruit & vegetables  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  Yield (1961  |  200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  150  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |  100  |  1961  |  1965  |  1969  |  1973  |  1977  |  1981  |  1985  |  1989  |  1993  |  1997  |  2001  |  2005  |  2009  |  2013  |  
  |  Data: FAO  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



7  |     |     |     |     |     |  World agricultural productivity and GDP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  1990  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  1970  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4,000  |  4,500  |  5,000  |  5,500  |  6,000  |  6,500  |  7,000  |  7,500  |  8,000  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  GDP per capita (US$2005)  |     |     |     |     |     |  Data: FAO, CRU  |  



Appendix A-78  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix A-79  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Appendix A-80  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix A-81  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Plant location  |     |  Russia  |  Middle East  |  North Africa  |  Sub-Sahara  |  USA  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Target market  |     |  W. Europe  |  India  |  India  |  Brazil  |  USA  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Feedstock  |     |  Natural gas  |  Natural gas  |  Natural gas  |  Natural gas  |  Natural gas  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Plant specifications  |  Units  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Effective capex  |  $ millions  |  1,116  |  971  |  1,047  |  1,015  |  1,138  |  
   |     |  
Capacity  |  tpd  |  2,200  |  2,050  |  2,050  |  2,050  |  2,200  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Feedstock price  |  $/GJ  |  3.28  |  1.28  |  1.60  |  2.00  |  4.00  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Efficiency  |  MMBtu/t  |  32.7  |  32.7  |  32.7  |  32.7  |  32.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Gas conversion cost  |  $/t  |  108  |  42  |  52  |  65  |  131  |  
   |     |  
Labour price  |  $/manyear  |  22,033  |  56,585  |  14,360  |  14,360  |  106,981  |  
   |     |  
Labour cost  |  $/t  |  1.25  |  4.02  |  0.82  |  1.02  |  4.30  |  
   |     |  
Power price  |  $/MWh  |  68.4  |  24.5  |  45.7  |  45.7  |  66.6  |  
   |     |  
Power cost  |  $/t  |  5.81  |  2.08  |  3.89  |  3.89  |  5.66  |  
   |     |  
Consumables cost  |  $/t  |  4.2  |  5.1  |  4.1  |  4.1  |  4.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Maintenance*  |  $/t  |  22.4  |  21.1  |  22.0  |  25.4  |  30.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Sales and admin  |  $/t  |  3.5  |  3.0  |  3.5  |  3.5  |  4.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Net realisations  |  $/t  |  65  |  -26  |  -20  |  -30  |  -26  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Business costs  |  $/t  |  211  |  51  |  67  |  70  |  153  |  
   |     |  
Capital investment  |  $/t  |  1,412  |  1,405  |  1,469  |  1,694  |  1,475  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Industry WACC  |  %  |  9.2%  |  9.2%  |  9.2%  |  9.2%  |  9.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Country risk  |  %  |  2.5%  |  1.0%  |  2.0%  |  4.0%  |  0.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
GDP deflator  |  %  |  2.0%  |  2.0%  |  2.0%  |  2.0%  |  2.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Real WACC  |  %  |  9.7%  |  8.2%  |  9.2%  |  11.2%  |  7.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Project lifetime  |  Years  |  25  |  25  |  25  |  25  |  25  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Capital servicing  |  $/t  |  152  |  134  |  152  |  204  |  129  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Avg. Depreciation  |  $/t  |  56  |  56  |  59  |  68  |  59  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Taxable portion  |  $/t  |  95  |  77  |  93  |  136  |  70  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Statutory tax rate  |  %  |  20%  |  0%  |  25%  |  32%  |  40%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Tax  |  $/t  |  19  |  0  |  23  |  44  |  28  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Economic costs  |  $/t  |  403  |  182  |  244  |  280  |  315  |  
   |     |  
Ammonia LRMC  |  $/t  |  358  |  (production weighted average of Russia and USA)  |  



Appendix A-82  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix A-83  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  Inflators  |  Unit  |  Base Year  |  CAGR (2012-38)  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Capital  |  CAPEX inflator  |  2013=100  |  100  |  1.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Energy and resources  |  Russia  |  US$/GJ  |  4.12  |  4.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Middle East  |  US$/GJ  |  0.95  |  5.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  North Africa  |  US$/GJ  |  1.14  |  5.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Sub-Saharan Africa  |  US$/GJ  |  0.71  |  2.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  USA  |  US$/GJ  |  3.84  |  3.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Weighted avg.  |  US$/GJ  |  3.98  |  3.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Gas inflator Index  |  2013=100  |  100  |  3.8%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Labour  |  Russia  |  US$/man year  |  22,033  |  4.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Middle East  |  US$/man year  |  56,585  |  3.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  North Africa  |  US$/man year  |  14,360  |  6.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Sub-Saharan Africa  |  US$/man year  |  14,360  |  6.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  USA  |  US$/man year  |  10,6981  |  2.6%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Weighted avg.  |  US$/man year  |  65,749  |  3.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Labour inflator  |  2013=100  |  100  |  3.1%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Chemical supplies  |  Russia  |  2005=100  |  136  |  2.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Middle East  |  2005=100  |  149  |  2.3%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  North Africa  |  2005=100  |  137  |  1.9%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Sub-Saharan Africa  |  2005=100  |  128  |  2.3%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  USA  |  2005=100  |  132  |  2.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Weighted avg.  |  2005=100  |  1.00  |  2.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Supplies inflator  |  2013=100  |  136  |  2.2%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Ocean freight  |  Ocean freight index  |  2005=100  |  98  |  2.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Ocean freight index  |  2013=100  |  1.00  |  2.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
LRMC (nominal)  |  Inc. productivity discount  |  US$/t  |  347  |  2.9%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
GDP Deflator  |  US GDP deflator  |  2005=100  |  117  |  2.0%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
LRMC (real)  |  constant dollars  |  2013 US$/t  |  296  |  0.9%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU  |     |     |     |     |  



Appendix A-84  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix A-85  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Appendix A-86  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Diagram A.5: CRU’s LRMC forecast to 2037  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US$/tonne  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
700  |     |     |     |     |  History  |     |     |     |     |  Cyclical forecast  |     |     |     |     |     |  LRMC  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
600  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
500  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
400  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2001  |  2003  |  2005  |  2007  |  2009  |  2011  |  2013  |  2015  |  2017  |  2019  |  2021  |  2023  |  2025  |  2027  |  2029  |  2031  |  2033  |  2035  |  2037  |     |  
US$/tonne  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
800  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Constant 2012$  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Nominal  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
700  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
600  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
500  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
400  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
100  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  2020  |  2021  |  2022  |  2023  |  2024  |  2025  |  2026  |  2027  |  2028  |  2029  |  2030  |  2031  |  2032  |  2033  |  2034  |  2035  |  2036  |  2037  |  2038  |  
Data: CRU  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Appendix A-87  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  2020  |  2021  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
LRMC (nominal)  |  349  |  362  |  354  |  362  |  374  |  387  |  402  |  413  |  423  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
LRMC (2013$/t)  |  349  |  354  |  339  |  339  |  343  |  348  |  353  |  356  |  358  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  2022  |  2023  |  2024  |  2025  |  2026  |  2027  |  2028  |  2029  |  2030  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
LRMC (nominal)  |  435  |  446  |  459  |  472  |  485  |  498  |  513  |  527  |  542  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
LRMC (2013$/t)  |  360  |  363  |  365  |  368  |  371  |  374  |  377  |  380  |  383  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  2031  |  2032  |  2033  |  2034  |  2035  |  2036  |  2037  |  2038  |  2039  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
LRMC (nominal)  |  557  |  573  |  590  |  607  |  625  |  641  |  658  |  676  |  694  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
LRMC (2013$/t)  |  386  |  390  |  393  |  396  |  400  |  403  |  405  |  408  |  411  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Appendix A-88  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix B-89  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Appendix B-90  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  World agricultural raw  |     |     |  
   |  materials price  |  World fertilisers price  |  World food price  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2014 Q1  |  6.2  |  -20.5  |  -2.5  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2014 Q2  |  3.6  |  -20.0  |  -1.3  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2014 Q3  |  2.0  |  -6.2  |  -5.6  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2014 Q4  |  -3.9  |  4.3  |  -7.4  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2015 Q1  |  -6.7  |  -3.1  |  -12.7  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2015 Q2  |  -7.9  |  4.9  |  -14.9  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2015 Q3  |  -4.9  |  0.6  |  -3.7  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2015 Q4  |  -2.3  |  1.7  |  6.0  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2016 Q1  |  -0.6  |  7.7  |  11.7  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2016 Q2  |  0.6  |  9.7  |  13.8  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2016 Q3  |  0.4  |  10.5  |  10.6  |  
   |     |     |     |  
2016 Q4  |  0.3  |  11.1  |  6.5  |  



   |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
North America  |  5.6  |  3.4  |  3.5  |  2.5  |  4.0  |  3.2  |  3.8  |  3.4  |  2.8  |  2.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Central & South America  |  7.5  |  2.2  |  -1.1  |  1.7  |  -2.3  |  -1.7  |  1.8  |  3.4  |  3.8  |  3.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Europe  |  4.8  |  2.5  |  -1.5  |  -0.7  |  1.2  |  0.5  |  1.9  |  2.3  |  2.0  |  2.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Asia & Australasia  |  13.1  |  6.8  |  5.4  |  5.0  |  4.9  |  5.0  |  5.5  |  5.2  |  5.0  |  4.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Africa  |  6.8  |  -1.3  |  3.4  |  -2.0  |  1.5  |  3.5  |  4.5  |  5.0  |  4.5  |  4.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Middle East  |  7.0  |  8.1  |  4.0  |  2.7  |  1.1  |  1.7  |  2.5  |  2.8  |  2.4  |  2.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
World  |  8.6  |  4.5  |  2.7  |  2.7  |  3.4  |  3.2  |  4.1  |  4.1  |  3.8  |  3.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Developed economies  |  7.2  |  1.9  |  0.6  |  0.6  |  2.5  |  2.2  |  3.0  |  2.6  |  2.2  |  2.1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Emerging economies  |  10.5  |  7.9  |  5.4  |  5.2  |  4.3  |  4.3  |  5.2  |  5.6  |  5.4  |  5.2  |  



   |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India  |  7.1  |  8.8  |  2.7  |  2.9  |  2.2  |  3.2  |  3.6  |  4.6  |  5.0  |  4.9  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  4.3  |  4.2  |  4.5  |  3.8  |  4.1  |  3.4  |  3.0  |  2.7  |  2.2  |  2.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
USA  |  1.9  |  -4.5  |  -3.4  |  12.0  |  -4.2  |  0.1  |  2.5  |  2.1  |  2.1  |  2.1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil  |  6.3  |  3.9  |  -2.1  |  7.3  |  0.9  |  0.7  |  1.3  |  1.8  |  2.4  |  2.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Appendix B-91  |  



   |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Indonesia  |  3.1  |  3.3  |  4.1  |  3.6  |  3.7  |  2.9  |  3.7  |  3.3  |  3.1  |  3.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Malaysia  |  2.5  |  5.7  |  1.3  |  2.1  |  4.8  |  2.7  |  2.1  |  1.9  |  1.8  |  1.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Korea  |  -4.3  |  -2.0  |  -0.9  |  5.8  |  2.0  |  3.5  |  2.9  |  2.1  |  1.6  |  1.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Thailand  |  -2.3  |  3.9  |  4.0  |  1.1  |  3.3  |  5.7  |  1.9  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  0.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Philippines  |  -0.2  |  2.6  |  2.8  |  1.1  |  1.9  |  4.5  |  5.1  |  4.3  |  4.0  |  3.9  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Singapore  |  2.4  |  3.8  |  1.2  |  -2.3  |  1.5  |  2.0  |  2.9  |  2.8  |  2.4  |  2.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Russia  |  -7.3  |  8.3  |  -1.4  |  1.9  |  3.1  |  -2.9  |  10.0  |  -1.0  |  1.9  |  0.9  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Denmark  |  30.3  |  -10.3  |  14.7  |  -19.7  |  2.6  |  1.8  |  1.8  |  1.1  |  0.7  |  0.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Turkey  |  2.8  |  4.7  |  4.2  |  3.3  |  2.6  |  2.6  |  2.4  |  2.3  |  2.2  |  2.1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
France  |  -3.4  |  3.9  |  -8.2  |  -1.4  |  2.8  |  0.8  |  1.4  |  1.3  |  1.1  |  1.1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Germany  |  -24.0  |  -13.8  |  14.3  |  -2.0  |  5.8  |  0.8  |  1.8  |  1.2  |  0.6  |  0.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Spain  |  2.1  |  4.2  |  -12.8  |  15.6  |  7.6  |  2.8  |  2.8  |  2.8  |  2.4  |  2.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Poland  |  -5.4  |  0.0  |  -2.7  |  3.9  |  0.6  |  2.3  |  1.8  |  1.5  |  1.4  |  1.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Romania  |  -5.5  |  14.0  |  -24.6  |  18.8  |  2.6  |  1.6  |  1.9  |  1.5  |  1.6  |  1.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Italy  |  0.4  |  1.9  |  -2.7  |  0.6  |  -1.0  |  -0.3  |  0.5  |  0.8  |  0.9  |  0.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UK  |  -0.1  |  8.5  |  -4.6  |  -3.9  |  2.6  |  0.8  |  1.2  |  1.2  |  1.0  |  0.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Argentina  |  15.9  |  -3.8  |  -8.6  |  9.9  |  -0.3  |  0.3  |  1.5  |  1.6  |  1.7  |  1.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Mexico  |  0.8  |  -2.3  |  7.2  |  0.3  |  0.7  |  1.6  |  1.4  |  1.4  |  1.4  |  1.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chile  |  1.6  |  8.8  |  -0.5  |  4.3  |  -4.2  |  0.2  |  2.6  |  2.5  |  2.3  |  2.1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Australia  |  -1.9  |  5.2  |  -1.6  |  3.2  |  -2.9  |  0.8  |  2.6  |  2.3  |  2.0  |  2.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Canada  |  1.6  |  2.3  |  2.0  |  12.6  |  -7.0  |  0.4  |  0.5  |  0.6  |  0.6  |  0.5  |  



Appendix B-92  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  0.62  |  0.63  |  0.63  |  0.62  |  0.59  |  0.55  |  0.51  |  0.48  |  0.44  |  0.40  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India  |  1.30  |  1.29  |  1.27  |  1.25  |  1.21  |  1.17  |  1.14  |  1.11  |  1.08  |  1.05  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
USA  |  0.83  |  0.73  |  0.74  |  0.72  |  0.83  |  0.82  |  0.82  |  0.81  |  0.81  |  0.80  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Indonesia  |  1.33  |  1.28  |  1.25  |  1.22  |  1.18  |  1.14  |  1.11  |  1.07  |  1.04  |  1.02  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil  |  0.90  |  0.89  |  0.87  |  0.85  |  0.83  |  0.80  |  0.77  |  0.74  |  0.72  |  0.69  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Russia  |  -0.08  |  -0.16  |  -0.20  |  -0.23  |  -0.24  |  -0.25  |  -0.26  |  -0.27  |  -0.29  |  -0.32  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Japan  |  0.00  |  -0.03  |  -0.06  |  -0.09  |  -0.12  |  -0.14  |  -0.18  |  -0.21  |  -0.23  |  -0.26  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Mexico  |  1.24  |  1.25  |  1.25  |  1.23  |  1.20  |  1.15  |  1.11  |  1.07  |  1.04  |  1.02  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Philippines  |  1.71  |  1.74  |  1.74  |  1.74  |  1.72  |  1.69  |  1.67  |  1.65  |  1.63  |  1.61  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Germany  |  -0.13  |  0.05  |  0.18  |  0.22  |  0.19  |  0.12  |  0.05  |  0.00  |  -0.02  |  -0.04  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Turkey  |  1.25  |  1.27  |  1.28  |  1.26  |  1.20  |  1.11  |  1.02  |  0.95  |  0.90  |  0.88  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Thailand  |  0.22  |  0.30  |  0.32  |  0.32  |  0.29  |  0.24  |  0.19  |  0.16  |  0.13  |  0.10  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
France  |  0.49  |  0.48  |  0.46  |  0.46  |  0.48  |  0.47  |  0.45  |  0.43  |  0.42  |  0.40  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UK  |  0.80  |  0.80  |  0.67  |  0.67  |  0.79  |  0.75  |  0.73  |  0.68  |  0.66  |  0.62  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Italy  |  0.30  |  0.14  |  0.32  |  0.39  |  0.30  |  0.25  |  0.21  |  0.18  |  0.14  |  0.12  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South Africa  |  1.09  |  0.94  |  0.82  |  0.74  |  0.69  |  0.68  |  0.66  |  0.62  |  0.59  |  0.58  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South Korea  |  0.58  |  0.56  |  0.55  |  0.53  |  0.51  |  0.48  |  0.45  |  0.42  |  0.40  |  0.38  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Spain  |  0.44  |  0.35  |  0.00  |  -0.13  |  -0.12  |  -0.16  |  -0.19  |  -0.23  |  -0.26  |  -0.30  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Argentina  |  0.87  |  0.88  |  0.88  |  0.87  |  0.86  |  0.84  |  0.81  |  0.80  |  0.78  |  0.77  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Poland  |  0.62  |  0.37  |  0.00  |  0.02  |  0.05  |  0.04  |  0.02  |  -0.01  |  -0.03  |  -0.05  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Canada  |  1.12  |  1.01  |  1.15  |  1.16  |  1.12  |  1.15  |  1.00  |  0.99  |  0.97  |  0.96  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Malaysia  |  1.73  |  1.70  |  1.67  |  1.63  |  1.58  |  1.53  |  1.47  |  1.43  |  1.39  |  1.36  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Taiwan  |  0.24  |  0.25  |  0.49  |  0.41  |  0.30  |  0.28  |  0.26  |  0.24  |  0.19  |  0.16  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Australia  |  1.56  |  1.51  |  1.70  |  1.74  |  1.76  |  1.81  |  1.78  |  1.82  |  1.74  |  1.75  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Romania  |  -0.56  |  -0.50  |  -0.43  |  -0.29  |  -0.21  |  -0.19  |  -0.19  |  -0.19  |  -0.19  |  -0.20  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chile  |  0.93  |  0.92  |  0.90  |  0.88  |  0.87  |  0.85  |  0.83  |  0.81  |  0.79  |  0.77  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Netherlands  |  0.51  |  0.46  |  0.35  |  0.31  |  0.33  |  0.33  |  0.32  |  0.32  |  0.31  |  0.30  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
World  |  1.15  |  1.18  |  1.17  |  1.15  |  1.13  |  1.10  |  1.10  |  1.07  |  1.04  |  1.02  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix B-93  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Appendix B-94  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Exchange rates  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  6.77  |  6.46  |  6.31  |  6.15  |  6.16  |  6.25  |  6.21  |  6.05  |  5.97  |  5.90  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Euro  |  0.75  |  0.72  |  0.78  |  0.75  |  0.75  |  0.94  |  1.00  |  1.00  |  0.98  |  0.96  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India  |  45.7  |  46.7  |  53.5  |  58.6  |  61.0  |  63.0  |  65.1  |  67.2  |  69.1  |  71.1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Japan  |  88  |  80  |  80  |  98  |  106  |  123  |  132  |  136  |  138  |  138  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UK  |  0.65  |  0.62  |  0.63  |  0.64  |  0.61  |  0.67  |  0.68  |  0.68  |  0.68  |  0.68  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Australia  |  1.09  |  0.97  |  0.97  |  1.04  |  1.11  |  1.33  |  1.23  |  1.17  |  1.15  |  1.13  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil  |  1.76  |  1.67  |  1.95  |  2.16  |  2.35  |  3.16  |  3.33  |  3.45  |  3.60  |  3.68  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Canada  |  1.03  |  0.99  |  1.00  |  1.03  |  1.10  |  1.23  |  1.18  |  1.11  |  1.09  |  1.07  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chile  |  510  |  484  |  486  |  495  |  570  |  615  |  589  |  567  |  548  |  538  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Russia  |  30.4  |  29.4  |  31.1  |  31.8  |  38.4  |  61.3  |  56.9  |  53.7  |  51.6  |  49.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South Africa  |  7.32  |  7.26  |  8.20  |  9.64  |  10.85  |  11.42  |  11.13  |  11.26  |  11.61  |  12.00  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Inflation rates  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
USA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Consumer prices  |  1.6  |  3.1  |  2.1  |  1.5  |  1.6  |  0.0  |  2.2  |  2.3  |  2.3  |  2.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
GDP deflator  |  1.2  |  2.1  |  1.8  |  1.5  |  1.5  |  1.0  |  2.3  |  2.1  |  2.0  |  2.1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Consumer Prices  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  3.3  |  5.4  |  2.6  |  2.6  |  2.0  |  1.4  |  2.3  |  2.6  |  2.9  |  3.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Eurozone  |  1.6  |  2.7  |  2.5  |  1.3  |  0.4  |  -0.1  |  1.1  |  1.4  |  1.5  |  1.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India  |  10.3  |  9.6  |  9.7  |  10.1  |  7.2  |  5.5  |  5.9  |  5.8  |  5.6  |  5.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Japan  |  -0.7  |  -0.3  |  0.0  |  0.4  |  2.7  |  0.3  |  0.7  |  2.2  |  1.4  |  1.1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UK  |  3.3  |  4.5  |  2.8  |  2.6  |  1.5  |  0.2  |  1.9  |  2.0  |  2.0  |  1.9  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Australia  |  2.9  |  3.3  |  1.8  |  2.4  |  2.5  |  2.1  |  3.3  |  3.0  |  3.0  |  2.9  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil  |  5.0  |  6.6  |  5.4  |  6.2  |  6.3  |  7.5  |  5.6  |  5.0  |  4.7  |  4.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Canada  |  1.8  |  2.9  |  1.5  |  1.0  |  1.9  |  0.8  |  2.2  |  2.0  |  2.0  |  2.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chile  |  1.4  |  3.3  |  3.0  |  1.9  |  4.4  |  3.8  |  3.1  |  3.0  |  3.0  |  3.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Russia  |  6.8  |  8.4  |  5.1  |  6.8  |  7.8  |  16.7  |  7.7  |  5.9  |  5.4  |  4.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South Africa  |  4.3  |  5.0  |  5.7  |  5.8  |  6.1  |  4.8  |  6.3  |  6.7  |  6.1  |  5.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Appendix B-95  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Short-term interest rates  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Australia  |  4.5  |  4.8  |  3.9  |  2.8  |  2.7  |  2.7  |  3.1  |  4.2  |  5.4  |  5.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Canada  |  0.6  |  0.9  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  0.9  |  0.8  |  1.3  |  2.2  |  3.1  |  3.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  2.7  |  5.3  |  4.6  |  5.0  |  5.1  |  4.8  |  5.1  |  5.3  |  5.3  |  5.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Eurozone  |  0.8  |  1.4  |  0.6  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.0  |  0.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Japan  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.1  |  0.2  |  0.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UK  |  0.7  |  0.9  |  0.8  |  0.5  |  0.5  |  0.5  |  0.8  |  1.4  |  2.0  |  2.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
USA  |  0.3  |  0.3  |  0.4  |  0.3  |  0.2  |  0.4  |  1.3  |  2.5  |  3.2  |  3.8  |  



Country/region  |  Updated  |  
   |     |  
Asia  |     |  
   |     |  
China: Further policy support required  |  New this month  |  
   |     |  
India: Economy remains on trend for strong growth  |  February  |  
   |     |  
Indonesia: Investment and reforms to boost 2015 growth  |  New this month  |  
   |     |  
Japan: Stronger 2015 supported by looser policy stance  |  January  |  
   |     |  
Korea: Policy settings sustain healthy growth  |  January  |  
   |     |  
Malaysia: Economy losing strength as headwinds gather  |  January  |  
   |     |  
Thailand: Domestic demand and tourism to drive 2015  |  New this month  |  
   |     |  
Vietnam: Powering ahead on strong domestic demand  |  February  |  
   |     |  
Americas  |     |  
   |     |  
USA: Investment growth to rebound  |  New this month  |  
   |     |  
Brazil: Difficult year ahead  |  New this month  |  
   |     |  
Mexico: Trade links and reform agenda to spur growth  |  New this month  |  
   |     |  
Europe, Middle-East and Africa  |     |  
   |     |  
Eurozone: Outlook mixed and risky, but improving  |  December  |  
   |     |  
Germany: Consumers to lead recovery in 2015  |  December  |  
   |     |  
Italy: Return to growth in 2015, but only just  |  December  |  
   |     |  
Central &Eastern; Europe: Exposure to Russia dents export sector  |  New this month  |  
   |     |  
Russia: Rouble collapses as markets panic  |  December  |  
   |     |  
Turkey: Benefiting from reduced oil import bill  |  February  |  
   |     |  
Middle-East Gulf: Assets cushion GCC from oil’s slump  |  December  |  
   |     |  
North Africa: Recovery expected following political upheavals  |  New this month  |  
   |     |  



Appendix B-96  |  Confidential  |  



  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  China: Further policy support required  |     |  
  |  China: Economic forecast summary  |  • A weak start to 2015 means further policy easing  |  
  |  % change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  will be needed to meet the targets of GDP growth  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  of “around 7%” and the creation of 10 million new  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |  2015  |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |  urban jobs. Activity should pick up after Q1, with  |  
  |  10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  centrally  |  funded  |  infrastructure  |  investment  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  leading the way. However, local government  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  investment could be hit by new funding rules and  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  it’ll be another difficult year for real estate.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Exports will help IP growth outperform  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  construction.  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • We expect a managed deceleration in economic  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth into the medium term, but investment and  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  construction will see relative sharp slowdowns as  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  the economy rebalance. Risks are skewed to the  |  
  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  downside due to China’s very rapid rise in debt  |  
  |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  since 2008.  |  The  |  government’s reforms  |  to  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  rebalance the economy away from investment and  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  industry are vital, but also entail significant  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  implementation risks.  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  India: Economy remains on trend for  |     |  
  |  India: Economic forecast summary  |  strong growth  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  % change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • GDP has been rebased and growth over the last  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  two years is now estimated to have been stronger  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  than data  |  previously  |  showed.  |  Most  |  recent  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |  indicators are favourable and imply that growth  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  will be stronger this year than last. Headwinds to  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth such as high inflation and the current  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  account deficit  |  are  |  abating  |  and  |  the  |  rupee has  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  stabilised.  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  As these  |  headwinds  |  subside,  |  more  |  room  |  is  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  created for pro-growth policy. The government  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  has taken advantage of falling oil prices by  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  removing diesel subsidies and the central bank  |  
  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  has begun to loosen policy on the back of easing  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  price pressures. We expect GDP growth will  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  soften from the sharply upward revised outturn in  |  
  |  Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2014 and from fast growth in 2015 to average  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  6.5%pa over the next few years. Faster growth is  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  conditional on further economic reform.  |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Indonesia: Investment and reforms to  |     |  
  |  Indonesia: Economic forecast summary  |  boost 2015 growth  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  •  |  GDP growth slowed  |  to 5.0% in  |  2014,  |  with  |  all  |  
  |  % change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  components contributing to a weaker outturn.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  We’re expecting GDP growth of 5.5% in 2015 as  |  
  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |  2014  |     |     |  2015  |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |  domestic demand picks up on the back of low  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  inflation,  |  improving  |  sentiment  |  and  |  a  |  more  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  accommodative  |  policy  |  stance.  |  Government  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  reforms to cut bureaucracy, remove bottlenecks  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  and ease regulation should gather momentum  |  
  |  4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  and help rally investment in particular.  |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • However, growth will be constrained by weaker  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  export revenue due to softer commodity prices.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  But subsidy rationalisation should mean that the  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  government will have more fiscal room this year,  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  which is potentially positive for infrastructure  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  investment.  |  Addressing  |  structural  |     |  problems  |  
  |  Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  would improve investor sentiment, raise  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  productivity and push GDP growth beyond the 5-  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  5.5% we currently see as trend growth.  |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Appendix B-97  |  



  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Japan: Stronger 2015 supported by  |     |     |  
  |  Japan: Economic forecast summary  |  looser policy stance  |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  % change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The economy likely returned to growth in Q4, in  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  so doing, exiting recession. The broad trend of IP  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth suggests that weakness since the start of  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |  2014  |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  last year is turning stronger and we expect output  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  to improve over the next few  |  years.  |  Other  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  indicators, such as the manufacturing PMI and the  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  OECD’s leading indicator of economic activity,  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  reinforce our expectation that the economy will  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  slowly recover in 2015.  |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Prospects are better for 2015. The QQE extension  |  
  |  -1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  should, through a weaker yen, support inflation  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  and may boost exports.  |  Real interest rates have  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  -2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  fallen which should stimulate demand and lift  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  consumer spending.  |  What’s  |  more,  |  a  |  less  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  contractionary fiscal policy stance (there isn’t now  |  
  |  Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  a second VAT hike in October) should be more  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth-supportive. Upside risk to the medium-  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  term comes from as-yet unannounced reforms.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Korea: Policy settings sustain healthy  |  
  |  Korea: Economic forecast summary  |  growth  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  • GDP growth decelerated over 2014, from 0.9%  |  
  |  % change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  q/q in Q1 to 0.4% in Q4.  |  Investment has recently  |  
  |  8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  become weaker, particularly investment in  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  construction.  |  Government  |  spending  |  on  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  7  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  infrastructure was surprisingly soft at the end of  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2014. More accommodating fiscal policy this year  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  and earlier monetary policy loosening should  |  
  |  5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  support stronger growth in 2015 – we’re  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  expecting the economy to start accelerating in  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  coming months.  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Headline  |  inflation  |  has  |  slowed  |  due  |  to  |  falling  |  
  |  2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  commodity prices, particularly oil, but core  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  inflation remains higher. Despite won strength,  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  and given excess spare capacity and concerns  |  
  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  about rising household debt, it’s unlikely that the  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  central  |  bank will  |  cut  |  rates further.  |  Strong  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  fundamentals including a large fiscal surplus and  |  
  |  Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  the US recovery, which should boost exports,  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  mean that growth risks are tilted to the upside.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Malaysia: Economy losing strength as  |  
  |  Malaysia: Economic forecast summary  |  headwinds gather  |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  • The economy lost momentum throughout 2014  |  
  |  % change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  with slower private consumption and investment  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth  |  causing  |  GDP  |  growth  |  to  |  decelerate.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Tighter  |  monetary  |  policy will further dampen  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  domestic demand this year. Malaysia is a net  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  energy exporter and falling oil prices have  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  weakened government revenue (oil-related  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  income accounts for 30% of total revenue).  |  The  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  slump in oil prices is the largest headwind to  |  
  |  4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth.  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • On a positive note, the government has  |  
  |  2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  announced plans to introduce a common goods  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  and service tax to broaden the tax base and has  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  cut fuel subsidies. However, these measures risk  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  upward pressure on inflation, eating into incomes  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  and further weighing on economic growth into the  |  
  |  Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  medium term. The government’s plans to support  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  infrastructure investment provide upside risk to  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  medium-term economic growth.  |     |     |     |     |  



Appendix B-98  |  Confidential  |  



   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Thailand: Domestic demand and  |     |     |  
Thailand: Economic forecast summary  |  tourism to drive 2015  |     |     |     |     |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • GDP grew by 0.7% in 2014, driven almost entirely  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  by net trade and government spending. Inflation  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  will be more benign this year, which should  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  support accommodative monetary policy and  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  mean  |  stronger  |  domestic  |  demand.  |  We’re  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  expecting domestic demand to grow by 2.7% this  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  year, reversing last year’s contraction of 2.5%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  which was dragged down by weak investment. A  |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  rebounding tourism sector and the lower oil price  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  should take GDP growth close to 4% this year.  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The economy continues to face several headwinds,  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  such as high levels of household debt and the drag  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  on export growth from China growing more  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  modestly, which are risks to our outlook.  |  While  |  
   |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Thailand’s politics have quietened from the  |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  upheaval of 2014, a renewed bout of uncertainty  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  here would derail investment and remains a  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  significant risk.  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Vietnam: Powering ahead on strong  |     |  
Vietnam: Economic forecast summary  |  domestic demand  |     |     |     |     |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  GDP grew by 6.0% in 2014 on the back of strong  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  domestic demand and export growth. We expect  |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  further acceleration into the medium term.  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Exports should continue to grow robustly, as  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  manufacturing is  |  supported  |  by  |  a currency on  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  trend depreciation against the US dollar. While  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  large  |  inflows of  |  foreign direct investment, well  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  contained inflation and relatively low interest  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  rates  |  are  |  putting the economy on  |  a  |  more  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  sustainable growth path as it shifts reliance on  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  overseas demand and towards becoming more  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  dependent on investment and consumption.  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • CRU forecasts GDP growth to accelerate to around  |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  6.5%pa into the medium term, with strong  |  
   |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  contributions from exports and domestic demand.  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Downside risks, such as poor energy supply and a  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  slower than expected pace of economic  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  liberalisation dominate the outlook.  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  USA: Investment growth to rebound  |     |  
USA: Economic forecast summary  |  • Improving domestic conditions should facilitate an  |  
   |  improvement in household spending which will  |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  fuel growth of 3% this year. A rising tide will also  |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • benefit residential and business investment which  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  will drive industrial output and construction  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth through the year.  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The Fed has ended its monthly asset purchase  |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  program but will continue purchases to maintain  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  the size of its balance, providing further support  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  to the economy. The first interest rate rise is  |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  expected in mid to late 2015.  |     |  continued  |  low  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Relatively  |  cheap  |  energy and  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  interest rates will provide a favourable  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  environment for private sector growth into the  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  medium-term. These positives more than offset  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  ongoing drag from further fiscal deficit reduction,  |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  enabling the US to sustain growth of near 3% pa  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  in the forecast period, but ageing infrastructure is  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  a potential constraint.  |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Appendix B-99  |  



  |  Brazil: Economic forecast summary  |  Brazil: Difficult year ahead  |     |     |     |     |  
  |  • The economic environment in Brazil will continue  |  
  |  % change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  to be challenging during 2015. Interest rates will  |  
  |  7  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  remain high in an attempt to  |  curb persistently  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  strong inflation and this will keep consumer  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  spending subdued.  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  The weaker exchange rate will offer some  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  assistance  |  to  |  Brazilian  |  exporters  |  –  |  already  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  uncompetitive  |  due  |  to  |  high  |  wages  |  and  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  -1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  underdeveloped infrastructure – but weak  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  -3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  demand from abroad will temper this tailwind.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  -5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The government is reining in its spending to avoid  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  a downgrade of sovereign debt. However,  |  
  |  -7  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  removal of subsidies has exacerbated resentment  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |  2015  |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  -9  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  towards public officials whose reputation is  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  already  |  suffering amid corruption  |  allegations.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Without serious reform in the country,  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  prospective growth remains underwhelming for  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  an emerging market.  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Mexico: Trade links and reform agenda  |  
  |  Mexico: Economic forecast summary  |  to spur growth  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  % change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  We expect  |  increased  |  exports  |  to  |  the USA  |  to  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  continue to prop up manufacturing and ultimately  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  industrial production in Mexico in early 2015.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |  2014  |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Domestic weakness should start to dissipate as  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  progress is made with reforms in infrastructure  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  and civil works expenditure.  |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  Monetary conditions should also help. With  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  inflation contained within the central bank’s  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  target range and the bank seeing slack in the  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  economy, it will likely keep interest rates low until  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  later this year in support of consumer spending.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Finally, a competitive peso and weak real wage  |  
  |  -2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth has kept Mexican industry competitive,  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |  •  |  attracting foreign investment into export sectors.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  In the longer run, we expect robust growth  |  
  |  Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  approaching 4%, supported by favourable  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  demographics, expanding trade links, and reforms.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Eurozone: Outlook mixed and risky, but  |  
  |  Eurozone: Economic forecast summary  |  improving  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  • Improving survey data suggest that the Eurozone  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  % change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  economy is seeing some, albeit modest, upturn in  |  
  |  3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  momentum as the weaker euro benefits  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  exporters while European Central Bank (ECB)  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  action and sharply lower oil prices provide a lift to  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  domestic demand. The outlook is mixed and, for  |  
  |  1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  example, we forecast 2%+ growth in Spanish GDP  |  
  |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  in 2015 but no increase in Italy. Falling oil prices  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  bring deflation a step closer and will likely prompt  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  -1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  further ECB easing.  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Significant downside risks remain. Russia’s  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  -2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  economic problems may weigh on confidence, as  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |  could Greece’s renewed political uncertainty.  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  -3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Moreover, the region has high debt levels, fiscal  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  deficits,  |  a  |     |  weak  |  banking  |  sector,  |  high  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  unemployment, a shrinking working age  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
  |  Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  population and the threat of deflation.  |  In  |  all,  |  
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth prospects remain modest.  |     |     |     |  



Appendix B-100  |  Confidential  |  



Germany: Economic forecast summary  |  Germany: Consumers to lead recovery  |  
in 2015  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The economy stuttered in the second half of 2014  |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  as uncertainty over the potential implications of  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  the conflict in Ukraine prompted firms to cut  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  investment and inventories.  |  However, German  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  fundamentals are far healthier than in much of  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  the rest of the Eurozone.  |  In particular, German  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  households (and firms) are not highly leveraged,  |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  unemployment is at its lowest since 1991 and  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  falling, and exporters are competitive in  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  international markets.  |     |     |     |     |  
-3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • CRU expects a consumer led recovery in 2015 as  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  the tight labour market causes real income  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth  |  to  |  accelerate.  |  Residential construction  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  should benefit from this and from rising house  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  prices. Export growth will strengthen as world  |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  trade picks-up, supporting a recovery in industrial  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  production growth through the year.  |     |  
Italy: Economic forecast summary  |  Italy: Return to growth in 2015, but only  |  
just  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  After three  |  consecutive years of decline  |  CRU  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  expects Italian GDP to limp back to year-on-year  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |  growth in the second half of 2015. The weaker  |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  euro and recovering export markets should see  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  net trade make a positive contribution to growth.  |  
-1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • Domestic demand is forecast to contract for 2015  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  as a whole. Investment will shrink for the eighth  |  
-2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  successive year as business confidence remains  |  
-3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  absent.  |  Consumer  |  spending will be barely  |  
-4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  positive, held back by high unemployment and  |  
-5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  subdued real income growth.  |     |     |  
-6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • Italy is subject to significant downside risks. A high  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-7  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  GDP  |     |     |     |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |     |  public debt pile implies vulnerability to swings in  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  investors’  |  confidence.  |     |  Furthermore,  |  the  |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  governing left-right coalition  |  is weak and could  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  easily come under strain.  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
C & E Europe: Economic forecast  |  C. & E. Europe: Exposure to Russia  |     |  
summary (GDP)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  dents export sector  |     |     |     |     |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The outlook remains positive for Poland.  |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Improved confidence and public sector support  |  
4  |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |  2014  |     |     |  2015  |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |  should  |  boost investment  |  and consumption is  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  being buoyed by an improving labour market.  |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Overall, this should lead to a sustained period of  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  robust growth.  |     |     |     |     |  
-2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The Czech economy grew by 2.3% in 2014.  |  Less  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  restrictive fiscal policy, a weak exchange rate and  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  a low oil price should boost growth this year. We  |  
-6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  •  |  expect growth of close to 3% in the medium term.  |  
-8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Ukraine  |  continues to  |  be  |  hit by the ongoing  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  conflict. 2015 is likely to be a difficult year with  |  
   |     |     |     |  Poland  |     |     |     |     |  Czech Rep.  |     |     |     |     |     |  Ukraine  |     |  IMF enforced cuts taking  |  place. Our forecast  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  suggests a 5% fall in GDP in 2015 but a return to  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth thereafter. However, a failure to negotiate  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  peace is a downside risk.  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Appendix B-101  |  



   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Russia: Rouble collapses as markets  |  
Russia: Economic forecast summary  |  panic  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • Russia’s economy, already battered by the fallout  |  
10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  from the country’s intervention in Ukraine and  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  the ongoing problems of the Eurozone (its largest  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  trading partner), is being further hit by the 50%  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  plunge in international oil prices since the  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  summer.  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The darkening outlook has caused the rouble to  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  halve in value against the US$ since the start of  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-10  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2014. Overnight on December 15th the central  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  bank hiked interest rates by 6.5%points to 17% to  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-15  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  stem the currency’s collapse. Although CRU  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  assumes that the currency will stabilise in early  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-20  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2015, we expect GDP to contract sharply.  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Investment and construction will be hardest hit.  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |  The outlook  |  is highly uncertain  |  but  |  without a  |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  significant  |  improvement  |  in  |  the  |  business  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  environment in Russia the eventual return to  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth will only be to subdued growth rates.  |  
Turkey: Economic forecast summary  |  Turkey: Benefiting from reduced oil  |  
import bill  |     |     |     |     |     |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The Turkish economy has digested the shock of  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  sharp interest hikes  |  at the start of  |  2014 and  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  growth should accelerate in 2015 as investment  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  returns  |  to  |  growth  |  and  |  consumer  |  spending  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  accelerates. The country’s massive import bill for  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  oil will  |  fall  |  significantly, lowering inflation and  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  interest and boosting real disposable incomes.  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The lower price of oil will also  |  reduce Turkey’s  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  large current account deficit, reducing its reliance  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  on foreign capital and its exposure to swings in  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  investor sentiment. Exports will benefit from the  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |  weaker lira, contributing to accelerating industrial  |  
-2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  output growth. However, tensions in the Middle  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  GDP  |     |  Investment  |  Consumption  |  East, sluggish growth in the Eurozone – its largest  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  export market – and a still wide, albeit narrowing,  |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  current account deficit remain significant risks.  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Mid-East Gulf: Assets cushion GCC from  |  
Mid-East Gulf: Economic forecast  |  oil’s slump  |     |     |     |     |     |  
summary (GDP)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • Saudi GDP growth should slow in 2015 as weaker  |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  oil prices hit the non-oil economy and  |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  government  |  finances.  |  However,  |  substantial  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  foreign assets and low government debt implies  |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  that the government has the ability to sustain a  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  budget deficit and continue investing in  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  infrastructure.  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • In November the latest negotiations to resolve the  |  
-2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  12-year dispute over Iran’s nuclear program again  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
-4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  failed to reach agreement. Further softening of  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  sanctions accompanied a 7-month extension of  |  
-6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  the talks which, along with earlier concessions,  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |  
-8  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  should allow the economy to return to modest  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  Saudi Arabia  |     |     |  Iran  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  UAE  |  growth despite the slide in oil prices.  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • In the UAE, the non-oil sector should find support  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  from government construction projects, a  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  recovering property market and Dubai’s  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  successful bid to host the World Expo in 2020.  |  



Appendix B-102  |  Confidential  |  



   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  N.Africa: Recovery expected following  |  
North Africa: Economic forecast  |  political upheavals  |     |     |     |  
summary (GDP)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • Egypt is benefiting from a more stable political  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  environment and a push for investment.  |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  However, high inflation, weak public finances and  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |  balance of payments have the potential to cause  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  problems. We forecast Egypt to grow at just over  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  4% in 2015, gradually rising to over 5% growth by  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2018.  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • The Moroccan economy had a disappointing 2014,  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  compared to 2013. However, Morocco’s economy  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  should benefit from the upturn in the Eurozone  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  economy and subsidy reforms. We expect growth  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  of over 4% in 2015, reaching 5%+ in the years  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  after.  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  Egypt  |     |     |  Algeria  |     |     |     |  Morocco  |  • Steadier hydrocarbon output and public spending  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  should support growth in Algeria.  |  The  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  combination of a low oil price and constrained  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  production are limiting factors, with significant  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  investment needed.  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Other Africa: Nigeria’s outlook  |     |     |  
Other Africa: Economic forecast  |  increasingly uncertain  |     |     |     |  
summary (GDP)  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • Plunging oil prices are hitting Nigeria’s prospects  |  
% change y/y  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  and have prompted an 8% devaluation of the  |  
7  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  official Naira/$ rate. With conflicting escalating in  |  
   |     |     |     |  2013  |     |     |     |  2014  |     |     |     |  2015  |     |     |     |     |  2016-19  |     |     |     |     |     |  the north and elections to be held in February  |  
6  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  2015, the outlook is highly uncertain despite the  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
5  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  country’s rapid growth potential.  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • South Africa  |  should strengthen in  |  2015  |  as the  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  world economy picks up, although growth will be  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
3  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  held back by high inflation, labour market  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  disruptions and rising unit labour costs, stubborn  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  unemployment, persistent power shortages and  |  
1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  bloated twin deficits.  |     |     |     |  
0  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  • Much of the rest of Africa will benefit from lower  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  oil prices, continued inward investment into  |  
   |     |     |  S.Africa  |     |  Nigeria  |     |     |     |  Rest of Africa  |  developing  |  commodity  |  resources  |  and  |  
Data: CRU, Oxford Economics  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  strengthening  |  domestic  |  demand.  |  However,  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  political and social tensions represent a serious  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  constraint in many countries.  |     |     |  



   |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
North America  |  2.8  |  1.9  |  2.4  |  2.2  |  2.4  |  2.9  |  2.8  |  2.7  |  2.6  |  2.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Canada  |  3.4  |  3.0  |  1.9  |  2.0  |  2.5  |  2.1  |  2.2  |  2.4  |  2.4  |  2.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Mexico  |  5.1  |  4.0  |  3.8  |  1.7  |  2.1  |  3.1  |  3.5  |  3.4  |  3.5  |  3.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
USA  |  2.5  |  1.6  |  2.3  |  2.2  |  2.4  |  3.0  |  2.8  |  2.7  |  2.6  |  2.6  |  



Central & South America  |  5.8  |  4.1  |  2.2  |  2.9  |  0.4  |  -0.1  |  1.9  |  3.0  |  3.6  |  3.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Argentina  |  9.5  |  8.4  |  0.8  |  2.9  |  -0.4  |  0.5  |  2.7  |  2.8  |  2.9  |  3.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil  |  7.5  |  2.7  |  1.0  |  2.5  |  0.0  |  -1.1  |  0.6  |  2.0  |  3.1  |  3.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chile  |  5.7  |  5.8  |  5.5  |  4.2  |  1.6  |  2.8  |  4.3  |  4.3  |  4.3  |  4.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Colombia  |  4.0  |  6.6  |  4.0  |  4.3  |  4.6  |  3.8  |  3.6  |  3.7  |  3.8  |  4.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Venezuela  |  -1.5  |  4.2  |  5.6  |  1.3  |  -3.8  |  -5.9  |  1.5  |  6.0  |  5.8  |  5.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Appendix B-103  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2010  |  2011  |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Europe  |  2.2  |  2.0  |  0.0  |  0.2  |  1.2  |  0.9  |  2.0  |  2.1  |  2.0  |  2.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Eurozone  |  2.0  |  1.7  |  -0.8  |  -0.4  |  0.9  |  1.4  |  1.8  |  1.7  |  1.6  |  1.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
France  |  1.9  |  2.1  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  0.4  |  1.1  |  1.7  |  1.6  |  1.6  |  1.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Germany  |  3.9  |  3.7  |  0.6  |  0.2  |  1.6  |  1.8  |  1.9  |  1.6  |  1.2  |  1.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Italy  |  1.7  |  0.7  |  -2.8  |  -1.7  |  -0.4  |  0.3  |  1.0  |  1.1  |  1.0  |  1.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Spain  |  0.0  |  -0.6  |  -2.1  |  -1.2  |  1.4  |  2.4  |  2.6  |  2.4  |  2.5  |  2.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Poland  |  3.6  |  4.9  |  1.8  |  1.6  |  3.3  |  3.3  |  3.8  |  3.4  |  3.3  |  3.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Russia  |  4.5  |  4.3  |  3.4  |  1.3  |  0.5  |  -6.5  |  0.5  |  3.8  |  3.7  |  3.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UK  |  1.9  |  1.6  |  0.7  |  1.7  |  2.6  |  2.7  |  2.8  |  2.7  |  2.4  |  2.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Asia & Australasia  |  7.7  |  4.9  |  4.5  |  4.5  |  4.1  |  4.4  |  4.7  |  4.5  |  4.4  |  4.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Australia  |  2.3  |  2.7  |  3.6  |  2.1  |  2.7  |  2.7  |  2.8  |  3.0  |  2.9  |  2.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  10.6  |  9.5  |  7.7  |  7.7  |  7.4  |  6.9  |  6.6  |  6.5  |  6.5  |  6.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India  |  11.0  |  6.2  |  4.4  |  6.4  |  7.2  |  7.5  |  7.0  |  6.6  |  6.6  |  6.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Indonesia  |  6.4  |  6.2  |  6.0  |  5.6  |  5.0  |  5.4  |  5.9  |  5.7  |  5.4  |  5.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Japan  |  4.7  |  -0.4  |  1.7  |  1.6  |  -0.1  |  0.8  |  1.9  |  0.9  |  0.7  |  0.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Malaysia  |  7.4  |  5.2  |  5.6  |  4.7  |  6.0  |  4.7  |  4.2  |  4.2  |  4.1  |  3.9  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Philippines  |  7.6  |  3.7  |  6.8  |  7.2  |  6.1  |  6.4  |  6.3  |  5.8  |  5.1  |  4.9  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South Korea  |  6.5  |  3.7  |  2.3  |  3.0  |  3.4  |  3.5  |  4.1  |  3.6  |  3.0  |  2.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Taiwan  |  10.6  |  3.8  |  2.1  |  2.2  |  3.7  |  3.8  |  3.9  |  3.7  |  3.0  |  2.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Thailand  |  7.8  |  0.1  |  6.5  |  2.9  |  0.7  |  3.9  |  3.8  |  3.6  |  3.3  |  3.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vietnam  |  6.4  |  6.2  |  5.2  |  5.4  |  6.0  |  6.3  |  6.4  |  6.9  |  6.4  |  6.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Africa  |  5.1  |  1.2  |  5.0  |  3.2  |  3.8  |  4.3  |  5.0  |  5.1  |  5.0  |  4.9  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
South Africa  |  3.0  |  3.2  |  2.2  |  2.2  |  1.5  |  2.1  |  2.5  |  2.8  |  3.0  |  3.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Middle East  |  6.1  |  7.2  |  3.5  |  2.1  |  2.5  |  2.8  |  3.9  |  4.1  |  4.1  |  4.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Gulf Cooperation Council  |  5.6  |  7.5  |  5.0  |  4.4  |  3.6  |  2.8  |  3.5  |  3.7  |  3.7  |  3.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Turkey  |  9.2  |  8.8  |  2.1  |  4.1  |  2.6  |  3.2  |  5.2  |  5.1  |  4.9  |  4.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Saudi Arabia  |  4.8  |  10.0  |  5.4  |  2.7  |  3.6  |  2.4  |  3.3  |  3.5  |  3.4  |  3.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UAE  |  1.6  |  4.9  |  4.7  |  5.2  |  2.5  |  2.8  |  3.4  |  3.5  |  3.5  |  3.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
World  |  4.5  |  3.0  |  2.4  |  2.5  |  2.6  |  2.7  |  3.3  |  3.3  |  3.3  |  3.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Developed economies  |  2.9  |  1.6  |  1.2  |  1.3  |  1.7  |  2.1  |  2.4  |  2.2  |  2.1  |  2.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Emerging economies  |  7.1  |  6.3  |  4.9  |  4.6  |  4.1  |  3.6  |  4.6  |  5.0  |  5.0  |  4.9  |  



Appendix B-104  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |     |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
USA:  |  Base case  |  2.2  |  2.4  |  3.0  |  2.8  |  2.7  |  2.6  |  2.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  2.2  |  2.4  |  3.2  |  3.4  |  2.9  |  2.7  |  2.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Eurozone:  |  Base case  |  -0.4  |  0.9  |  1.4  |  1.8  |  1.7  |  1.6  |  1.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  -0.4  |  0.9  |  1.5  |  2.0  |  1.8  |  1.7  |  1.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Japan:  |  Base case  |  1.6  |  -0.1  |  0.8  |  1.9  |  0.9  |  0.7  |  0.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  1.6  |  -0.1  |  1.0  |  2.1  |  1.1  |  0.8  |  0.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China:  |  Base case  |  7.7  |  7.4  |  6.9  |  6.6  |  6.5  |  6.5  |  6.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  7.7  |  7.4  |  7.3  |  7.2  |  6.7  |  6.6  |  6.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil:  |  Base case  |  2.5  |  0.0  |  -1.1  |  0.6  |  2.0  |  3.1  |  3.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  2.5  |  0.0  |  -0.9  |  1.0  |  2.5  |  3.2  |  3.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Appendix B-105  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |     |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Russia:  |  Base case  |  1.3  |  0.5  |  -6.5  |  0.5  |  3.8  |  3.7  |  3.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  1.3  |  0.5  |  -9.1  |  -0.6  |  3.7  |  3.8  |  3.5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India:  |  Base case  |  6.4  |  7.2  |  7.5  |  7.0  |  6.6  |  6.6  |  6.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  6.4  |  7.2  |  7.9  |  7.5  |  7.1  |  7.0  |  7.0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
World:  |  Base case  |  2.5  |  2.6  |  2.7  |  3.3  |  3.3  |  3.3  |  3.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  2.5  |  2.6  |  2.9  |  3.6  |  3.5  |  3.3  |  3.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Appendix B-106  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |     |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
USA:  |  Base case  |  2.2  |  2.4  |  3.0  |  2.8  |  2.7  |  2.6  |  2.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  2.2  |  2.4  |  2.5  |  2.5  |  3.0  |  2.9  |  2.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Eurozone:  |  Base case  |  -0.4  |  0.9  |  1.4  |  1.8  |  1.7  |  1.6  |  1.6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  -0.4  |  0.9  |  0.7  |  1.2  |  2.0  |  1.9  |  1.9  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Japan:  |  Base case  |  1.6  |  -0.1  |  0.8  |  1.9  |  0.9  |  0.7  |  0.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  1.6  |  -0.1  |  0.0  |  1.3  |  1.2  |  1.1  |  1.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China:  |  Base case  |  7.7  |  7.4  |  6.9  |  6.6  |  6.5  |  6.5  |  6.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  7.7  |  7.4  |  4.2  |  6.1  |  6.3  |  6.6  |  6.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil:  |  Base case  |  2.5  |  0.0  |  -1.1  |  0.6  |  2.0  |  3.1  |  3.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  2.5  |  0.0  |  -1.9  |  0.1  |  2.2  |  3.1  |  3.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Russia:  |  Base case  |  1.3  |  0.5  |  -6.5  |  0.5  |  3.8  |  3.7  |  3.3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  1.3  |  0.5  |  -7.6  |  -0.4  |  4.3  |  4.2  |  3.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India:  |  Base case  |  6.4  |  7.2  |  7.5  |  7.0  |  6.6  |  6.6  |  6.7  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  6.4  |  7.2  |  6.9  |  6.7  |  7.0  |  6.7  |  6.8  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
World:  |  Base case  |  2.5  |  2.6  |  2.7  |  3.3  |  3.3  |  3.3  |  3.2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Scenario  |  2.5  |  2.6  |  1.8  |  2.8  |  3.6  |  3.5  |  3.4  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Data: CRU  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Confidential  |  Appendix B-107  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Appendix B-108  |  Confidential  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
World Total  |  114,688  |  116,597  |  118,457  |  120,824  |  123,513  |  125,663  |  128,023  |  
Europe & CIS Total  |  16,339  |  16,400  |  16,120  |  16,623  |  17,261  |  17,533  |  17,800  |  
West Europe Total  |  8,586  |  8,620  |  8,644  |  8,622  |  8,637  |  8,658  |  8,679  |  
Austria  |  91  |  90  |  88  |  87  |  85  |  83  |  82  |  
Belgium  |  315  |  318  |  320  |  323  |  325  |  328  |  331  |  
Cyprus  |  9  |  9  |  9  |  9  |  9  |  9  |  9  |  
Denmark  |  192  |  190  |  187  |  185  |  183  |  181  |  179  |  
Finland  |  128  |  125  |  122  |  118  |  115  |  112  |  109  |  
France  |  2,251  |  2,264  |  2,338  |  2,320  |  2,348  |  2,379  |  2,410  |  
Germany  |  1,682  |  1,681  |  1,693  |  1,706  |  1,718  |  1,733  |  1,747  |  
Greece  |  164  |  157  |  151  |  145  |  139  |  133  |  127  |  
Iceland  |  2  |  2  |  1  |  1  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Ireland  |  425  |  443  |  461  |  478  |  495  |  512  |  529  |  
Italy  |  730  |  713  |  699  |  686  |  672  |  659  |  645  |  
Malta  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  
Netherlands  |  215  |  209  |  203  |  197  |  192  |  186  |  181  |  
Norway  |  90  |  89  |  87  |  86  |  84  |  83  |  81  |  
Portugal  |  62  |  59  |  57  |  55  |  53  |  51  |  49  |  
Spain  |  931  |  924  |  923  |  922  |  921  |  921  |  920  |  
Sweden  |  163  |  161  |  159  |  157  |  156  |  154  |  152  |  
Switzerland  |  34  |  32  |  31  |  29  |  28  |  26  |  25  |  
United Kingdom  |  1,102  |  1,155  |  1,113  |  1,118  |  1,112  |  1,107  |  1,102  |  
East Europe Total  |  4,432  |  4,321  |  4,295  |  4,545  |  4,883  |  5,034  |  5,177  |  
Albania  |  17  |  16  |  16  |  16  |  16  |  15  |  15  |  
Bosnia & Herzegovina  |  19  |  21  |  22  |  24  |  26  |  27  |  29  |  
Bulgaria  |  220  |  230  |  241  |  252  |  263  |  274  |  286  |  
Croatia  |  115  |  116  |  118  |  119  |  120  |  122  |  123  |  
Czech Republic  |  280  |  279  |  277  |  275  |  273  |  271  |  268  |  
Estonia  |  14  |  18  |  20  |  15  |  19  |  21  |  16  |  
Georgia  |  24  |  25  |  25  |  26  |  26  |  27  |  27  |  
Hungary  |  281  |  279  |  278  |  276  |  275  |  274  |  272  |  
Latvia  |  59  |  61  |  63  |  66  |  68  |  70  |  72  |  
Lithuania  |  182  |  186  |  190  |  194  |  198  |  202  |  206  |  
Macedonia  |  16  |  16  |  16  |  17  |  17  |  17  |  17  |  
Moldova  |  15  |  15  |  15  |  16  |  16  |  16  |  16  |  
Poland  |  1,314  |  1,286  |  1,327  |  1,367  |  1,408  |  1,450  |  1,493  |  
Romania  |  468  |  496  |  524  |  551  |  578  |  605  |  632  |  
Serbia  |  123  |  127  |  130  |  134  |  138  |  142  |  145  |  
Slovakia  |  101  |  102  |  102  |  102  |  102  |  103  |  103  |  
Slovenia  |  38  |  38  |  38  |  39  |  39  |  39  |  39  |  
Ukraine  |  1,148  |  1,010  |  891  |  1,058  |  1,301  |  1,359  |  1,417  |  
CIS Total  |  3,321  |  3,458  |  3,181  |  3,456  |  3,740  |  3,841  |  3,944  |  
Armenia  |  15  |  16  |  16  |  16  |  17  |  17  |  17  |  
Azerbaijan  |  22  |  22  |  22  |  23  |  23  |  23  |  23  |  
Belarus  |  589  |  596  |  633  |  654  |  674  |  695  |  717  |  
Kazakhstan  |  138  |  146  |  155  |  164  |  173  |  182  |  192  |  
Kyrgyzstan  |  40  |  43  |  46  |  49  |  53  |  56  |  59  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix C-109  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Russia  |  1,673  |  1,777  |  1,438  |  1,666  |  1,905  |  1,958  |  2,014  |  
Tajikistan  |  9  |  8  |  8  |  7  |  6  |  5  |  5  |  
Turkmenistan  |  328  |  345  |  362  |  379  |  396  |  413  |  430  |  
Uzbekistan  |  507  |  504  |  500  |  497  |  494  |  491  |  487  |  
Africa Total  |  3,339  |  3,402  |  3,577  |  3,691  |  3,807  |  3,923  |  4,043  |  
North Africa Total  |  1,567  |  1,533  |  1,610  |  1,622  |  1,634  |  1,646  |  1,658  |  
Algeria  |  43  |  43  |  44  |  44  |  44  |  45  |  45  |  
Egypt  |  1,154  |  1,120  |  1,199  |  1,212  |  1,225  |  1,238  |  1,252  |  
Libya  |  31  |  30  |  30  |  29  |  29  |  28  |  28  |  
Morocco  |  207  |  206  |  205  |  204  |  204  |  203  |  202  |  
Sudan  |  49  |  48  |  47  |  45  |  44  |  42  |  41  |  
Tunisia  |  83  |  85  |  86  |  87  |  88  |  89  |  90  |  
East Africa Total  |  577  |  613  |  649  |  687  |  725  |  764  |  804  |  
Ethiopia  |  123  |  128  |  133  |  138  |  143  |  149  |  154  |  
Kenya  |  109  |  113  |  118  |  123  |  128  |  133  |  138  |  
Madagascar  |  3  |  3  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  
Malawi  |  96  |  105  |  115  |  124  |  134  |  144  |  155  |  
Mauritius  |  12  |  12  |  12  |  12  |  12  |  12  |  12  |  
Mozambique  |  48  |  49  |  50  |  51  |  52  |  53  |  54  |  
Somalia  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  
Tanzania  |  87  |  97  |  107  |  117  |  129  |  140  |  152  |  
Uganda  |  9  |  10  |  11  |  11  |  12  |  13  |  13  |  
Zambia  |  33  |  34  |  35  |  36  |  37  |  37  |  38  |  
Zimbabwe  |  51  |  56  |  61  |  65  |  70  |  74  |  79  |  
West Africa Total  |  692  |  749  |  808  |  868  |  930  |  994  |  1,059  |  
Benin  |  22  |  23  |  23  |  23  |  23  |  24  |  24  |  
Burkina Faso  |  32  |  35  |  38  |  41  |  45  |  48  |  52  |  
Cote d'Ivoire  |  49  |  51  |  53  |  56  |  58  |  61  |  64  |  
Gambia  |  2  |  2  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  
Ghana  |  29  |  32  |  34  |  36  |  39  |  41  |  44  |  
Guinea  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  
Mali  |  78  |  82  |  86  |  90  |  95  |  99  |  104  |  
Mauritania  |  9  |  10  |  11  |  11  |  12  |  13  |  14  |  
Niger  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  
Nigeria  |  462  |  506  |  552  |  600  |  648  |  699  |  751  |  
Togo  |  5  |  5  |  4  |  3  |  2  |  1  |  0  |  
Central Africa Total  |  50  |  51  |  49  |  50  |  51  |  49  |  49  |  
Angola  |  5  |  6  |  5  |  6  |  7  |  6  |  6  |  
Cameroon  |  21  |  21  |  21  |  21  |  21  |  22  |  22  |  
Chad  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  
Congo  |  2  |  2  |  2  |  2  |  2  |  2  |  2  |  
DR Congo  |  18  |  17  |  17  |  17  |  16  |  16  |  15  |  
Southern Africa Total  |  452  |  456  |  460  |  464  |  467  |  470  |  473  |  
Botswana  |  6  |  6  |  7  |  7  |  8  |  8  |  9  |  
South Africa  |  446  |  449  |  453  |  456  |  459  |  462  |  464  |  



Appendix C-110  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
North America Total  |  14,653  |  14,317  |  14,278  |  14,547  |  14,653  |  14,652  |  14,824  |  
North America Total  |  14,653  |  14,317  |  14,278  |  14,547  |  14,653  |  14,652  |  14,824  |  
Canada  |  2,396  |  2,228  |  2,249  |  2,269  |  2,290  |  2,222  |  2,264  |  
United States  |  12,257  |  12,090  |  12,029  |  12,277  |  12,363  |  12,430  |  12,560  |  
Central & South America Total  |  7,781  |  7,941  |  7,939  |  8,100  |  8,373  |  8,547  |  8,721  |  
Caribbean Total  |  136  |  137  |  139  |  140  |  141  |  142  |  142  |  
Cuba  |  54  |  54  |  54  |  55  |  55  |  55  |  55  |  
Dominican Republic  |  62  |  63  |  65  |  66  |  68  |  69  |  70  |  
Haiti  |  3  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  
Jamaica  |  4  |  4  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  
Lesser Antilles  |  7  |  7  |  6  |  6  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  
Trinidad  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  
Central America Total  |  1,723  |  1,741  |  1,773  |  1,806  |  1,839  |  1,874  |  1,910  |  
Belize  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  
Costa Rica  |  69  |  70  |  70  |  71  |  72  |  73  |  74  |  
El Salvador  |  51  |  53  |  54  |  56  |  57  |  59  |  60  |  
Guatemala  |  117  |  120  |  122  |  125  |  127  |  130  |  132  |  
Honduras  |  66  |  68  |  70  |  72  |  75  |  77  |  79  |  
Mexico  |  1,344  |  1,353  |  1,377  |  1,401  |  1,425  |  1,451  |  1,478  |  
Nicaragua  |  47  |  49  |  51  |  52  |  54  |  55  |  57  |  
Panama  |  19  |  19  |  19  |  18  |  18  |  18  |  18  |  
South America Total  |  5,922  |  6,063  |  6,027  |  6,154  |  6,394  |  6,532  |  6,669  |  
Argentina  |  865  |  862  |  870  |  878  |  884  |  891  |  897  |  
Bolivia  |  14  |  15  |  16  |  17  |  19  |  20  |  21  |  
Brazil  |  3,497  |  3,583  |  3,483  |  3,547  |  3,723  |  3,800  |  3,875  |  
Chile  |  300  |  306  |  311  |  316  |  321  |  326  |  330  |  
Colombia  |  414  |  432  |  448  |  465  |  483  |  498  |  514  |  
Ecuador  |  135  |  139  |  142  |  146  |  149  |  153  |  156  |  
Guyana  |  16  |  16  |  17  |  17  |  18  |  18  |  19  |  
Paraguay  |  93  |  99  |  105  |  112  |  119  |  126  |  133  |  
Peru  |  243  |  246  |  250  |  253  |  256  |  259  |  262  |  
Suriname  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  3  |  3  |  
Uruguay  |  70  |  72  |  75  |  77  |  79  |  80  |  82  |  
Venezuela  |  271  |  288  |  305  |  322  |  340  |  358  |  376  |  
Asia Total  |  71,050  |  72,895  |  74,905  |  76,162  |  77,653  |  79,174  |  80,732  |  
Middle East Total  |  3,303  |  3,366  |  3,466  |  3,547  |  3,635  |  3,726  |  3,830  |  
Bahrain  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  
Iran  |  1,207  |  1,226  |  1,275  |  1,311  |  1,348  |  1,385  |  1,422  |  
Iraq  |  165  |  179  |  194  |  204  |  220  |  236  |  266  |  
Israel  |  46  |  47  |  47  |  48  |  49  |  49  |  50  |  
Jordan  |  11  |  12  |  12  |  13  |  14  |  15  |  15  |  
Kuwait  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  2  |  2  |  
Lebanon  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  19  |  
Oman  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  4  |  
Qatar  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  2  |  2  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix C-111  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Saudi Arabia  |  131  |  130  |  129  |  127  |  126  |  125  |  123  |  
Syria  |  185  |  180  |  174  |  169  |  164  |  158  |  153  |  
Turkey  |  1,496  |  1,531  |  1,571  |  1,611  |  1,652  |  1,694  |  1,736  |  
United Arab Emirates  |  34  |  34  |  35  |  36  |  37  |  37  |  38  |  
South Asia Total  |  22,299  |  23,019  |  24,287  |  24,767  |  25,467  |  26,204  |  26,958  |  
Afghanistan  |  32  |  32  |  31  |  31  |  30  |  30  |  29  |  
Bangladesh  |  1,351  |  1,369  |  1,395  |  1,420  |  1,446  |  1,473  |  1,501  |  
Bhutan  |  2  |  2  |  2  |  2  |  3  |  3  |  3  |  
India  |  17,491  |  17,828  |  18,935  |  19,253  |  19,786  |  20,348  |  20,924  |  
Nepal  |  9  |  8  |  8  |  7  |  7  |  6  |  6  |  
Pakistan  |  3,216  |  3,573  |  3,701  |  3,830  |  3,963  |  4,102  |  4,244  |  
Sri Lanka  |  198  |  207  |  215  |  224  |  233  |  242  |  251  |  
South-East Asia Total  |  7,531  |  7,817  |  8,040  |  8,362  |  8,652  |  8,955  |  9,265  |  
Cambodia  |  65  |  69  |  73  |  77  |  82  |  86  |  90  |  
Indonesia  |  3,361  |  3,570  |  3,725  |  3,888  |  4,055  |  4,231  |  4,411  |  
Laos  |  8  |  9  |  9  |  10  |  11  |  11  |  12  |  
Malaysia  |  780  |  800  |  826  |  863  |  900  |  939  |  980  |  
Myanmar  |  52  |  50  |  49  |  47  |  46  |  44  |  42  |  
Philippines  |  499  |  497  |  495  |  493  |  491  |  488  |  485  |  
Singapore  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  7  |  7  |  7  |  8  |  
Thailand  |  1,347  |  1,373  |  1,410  |  1,446  |  1,483  |  1,522  |  1,561  |  
Vietnam  |  1,414  |  1,442  |  1,446  |  1,532  |  1,578  |  1,627  |  1,676  |  
East Asia Total  |  37,917  |  38,693  |  39,112  |  39,485  |  39,898  |  40,290  |  40,679  |  
China  |  36,988  |  37,776  |  38,209  |  38,594  |  39,019  |  39,423  |  39,824  |  
Japan  |  341  |  332  |  321  |  311  |  301  |  292  |  282  |  
Mongolia  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  
North Korea  |  168  |  168  |  169  |  169  |  170  |  170  |  171  |  
South Korea  |  236  |  231  |  226  |  221  |  216  |  211  |  206  |  
Taiwan  |  178  |  180  |  182  |  184  |  186  |  188  |  189  |  
Oceania Total  |  1,526  |  1,641  |  1,639  |  1,702  |  1,767  |  1,835  |  1,904  |  
Oceania Total  |  1,526  |  1,641  |  1,639  |  1,702  |  1,767  |  1,835  |  1,904  |  
Australia  |  1,195  |  1,305  |  1,298  |  1,356  |  1,416  |  1,479  |  1,544  |  
Fiji  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  
New Zealand  |  316  |  320  |  325  |  329  |  333  |  337  |  341  |  
Papua New Guinea  |  11  |  11  |  12  |  12  |  13  |  14  |  14  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  



Appendix C-112  |  Confidential  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
World Total  |  171,276  |  172,983  |  176,707  |  180,809  |  185,058  |  189,131  |  192,952  |  
Europe & CIS Total  |  38,060  |  36,959  |  36,548  |  36,526  |  37,004  |  38,000  |  39,428  |  
West Europe Total  |  13,670  |  14,190  |  14,169  |  14,134  |  14,053  |  14,117  |  14,154  |  
Austria  |  479  |  377  |  381  |  385  |  390  |  395  |  399  |  
Belgium  |  1,649  |  1,774  |  1,777  |  1,783  |  1,788  |  1,792  |  1,801  |  
Denmark  |  27  |  34  |  34  |  35  |  35  |  36  |  36  |  
Finland  |  340  |  367  |  367  |  367  |  368  |  369  |  370  |  
France  |  1,600  |  1,769  |  1,762  |  1,758  |  1,753  |  1,746  |  1,741  |  
Germany  |  3,395  |  3,724  |  3,697  |  3,680  |  3,643  |  3,643  |  3,645  |  
Greece  |  110  |  133  |  139  |  145  |  151  |  158  |  166  |  
Ireland  |  0  |  21  |  21  |  21  |  21  |  21  |  21  |  
Italy  |  766  |  726  |  727  |  730  |  733  |  736  |  740  |  
Netherlands  |  2,506  |  2,514  |  2,494  |  2,435  |  2,330  |  2,338  |  2,321  |  
Norway  |  751  |  677  |  677  |  677  |  677  |  677  |  677  |  
Portugal  |  137  |  152  |  154  |  157  |  160  |  164  |  167  |  
Spain  |  858  |  820  |  834  |  849  |  871  |  887  |  909  |  
Sweden  |  224  |  325  |  328  |  330  |  349  |  368  |  371  |  
Switzerland  |  48  |  32  |  31  |  31  |  30  |  30  |  29  |  
UK  |  780  |  745  |  747  |  751  |  755  |  758  |  761  |  
East Europe Total  |  10,678  |  8,882  |  8,834  |  8,560  |  8,562  |  8,682  |  8,800  |  
Bosnia & Herzegovina  |  0  |  18  |  18  |  18  |  18  |  18  |  18  |  
Bulgaria  |  420  |  367  |  367  |  367  |  367  |  367  |  367  |  
Croatia  |  427  |  381  |  396  |  396  |  396  |  396  |  396  |  
Czech Republic  |  396  |  320  |  320  |  320  |  319  |  319  |  319  |  
Estonia  |  15  |  55  |  55  |  55  |  55  |  55  |  55  |  
Georgia  |  200  |  220  |  220  |  221  |  221  |  221  |  221  |  
Hungary  |  464  |  371  |  378  |  381  |  378  |  376  |  374  |  
Lithuania  |  1,259  |  1,013  |  1,009  |  784  |  639  |  640  |  640  |  
Poland  |  2,323  |  2,497  |  2,460  |  2,292  |  2,311  |  2,315  |  2,319  |  
Romania  |  1,499  |  738  |  734  |  747  |  595  |  609  |  623  |  
Serbia  |  0  |  167  |  171  |  171  |  171  |  171  |  171  |  
Slovakia  |  376  |  498  |  501  |  504  |  507  |  509  |  512  |  
Slovenia  |  4  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  
Ukraine  |  3,295  |  2,235  |  2,203  |  2,304  |  2,583  |  2,683  |  2,782  |  
CIS Total  |  13,712  |  13,887  |  13,545  |  13,831  |  14,388  |  15,201  |  16,473  |  
Azerbaijan  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  173  |  345  |  345  |  
Belarus  |  986  |  996  |  1,008  |  1,088  |  1,078  |  1,089  |  1,102  |  
Kazakhstan  |  107  |  137  |  139  |  142  |  144  |  139  |  142  |  
Russia  |  10,909  |  11,065  |  10,551  |  10,732  |  11,091  |  11,394  |  12,310  |  
Turkmenistan  |  408  |  455  |  607  |  615  |  623  |  928  |  1,244  |  
Uzbekistan  |  1,303  |  1,234  |  1,239  |  1,254  |  1,279  |  1,305  |  1,330  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix D-113  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Africa Total  |  5,362  |  4,813  |  5,560  |  6,283  |  7,563  |  8,374  |  8,751  |  
North Africa Total  |  4,367  |  3,876  |  4,606  |  5,087  |  5,640  |  5,905  |  6,175  |  
Algeria  |  223  |  398  |  758  |  1,229  |  1,535  |  1,535  |  1,658  |  
Egypt  |  3,007  |  2,298  |  2,510  |  2,565  |  2,669  |  2,824  |  2,896  |  
Libya  |  202  |  190  |  193  |  193  |  193  |  193  |  193  |  
Morocco  |  682  |  694  |  788  |  721  |  863  |  973  |  1,048  |  
Tunisia  |  252  |  296  |  358  |  381  |  381  |  381  |  381  |  
East Africa Total  |  52  |  50  |  55  |  61  |  66  |  66  |  66  |  
Madagascar  |  15  |  14  |  19  |  24  |  29  |  29  |  30  |  
Zimbabwe  |  36  |  37  |  37  |  37  |  37  |  37  |  37  |  
West Africa Total  |  182  |  132  |  141  |  374  |  1,093  |  1,647  |  1,751  |  
Nigeria  |  182  |  121  |  130  |  363  |  1,082  |  1,636  |  1,740  |  
Senegal  |  0  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  
Central Africa Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Southern Africa Total  |  761  |  755  |  758  |  761  |  763  |  755  |  758  |  
Namibia  |  0  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  
South Africa  |  761  |  755  |  757  |  760  |  763  |  755  |  758  |  
North America Total  |  20,657  |  20,242  |  20,781  |  22,834  |  23,838  |  24,162  |  24,284  |  
North America Total  |  20,657  |  20,242  |  20,781  |  22,834  |  23,838  |  24,162  |  24,284  |  
Canada  |  3,398  |  3,551  |  3,512  |  3,519  |  3,566  |  3,622  |  3,637  |  
USA  |  17,259  |  16,691  |  17,269  |  19,315  |  20,272  |  20,540  |  20,648  |  
Central & South America Total  |  5,620  |  5,204  |  5,431  |  6,236  |  6,748  |  6,864  |  6,974  |  
Caribbean Total  |  977  |  824  |  836  |  815  |  781  |  782  |  783  |  
Cuba  |  17  |  23  |  23  |  24  |  25  |  26  |  27  |  
Trinidad  |  910  |  771  |  783  |  761  |  726  |  726  |  726  |  
Others  |  50  |  30  |  30  |  30  |  30  |  30  |  30  |  
Central America Total  |  998  |  1,009  |  1,160  |  1,481  |  1,484  |  1,498  |  1,504  |  
Mexico  |  998  |  1,009  |  1,160  |  1,481  |  1,484  |  1,498  |  1,504  |  
South America Total  |  3,646  |  3,370  |  3,435  |  3,939  |  4,483  |  4,583  |  4,687  |  
Argentina  |  703  |  651  |  690  |  709  |  737  |  778  |  834  |  
Bolivia  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  94  |  320  |  320  |  320  |  
Brazil  |  1,589  |  1,618  |  1,582  |  1,849  |  2,141  |  2,200  |  2,228  |  
Chile  |  342  |  369  |  413  |  490  |  490  |  489  |  507  |  
Colombia  |  202  |  177  |  177  |  177  |  177  |  177  |  177  |  
Peru  |  15  |  16  |  16  |  16  |  16  |  16  |  15  |  
Venezuela  |  794  |  537  |  557  |  602  |  602  |  602  |  603  |  
Asia Total  |  100,014  |  104,401  |  106,903  |  107,370  |  108,280  |  110,053  |  111,843  |  
Middle East Total  |  13,183  |  12,278  |  13,500  |  14,370  |  14,615  |  14,775  |  14,923  |  
Bahrain  |  354  |  424  |  425  |  426  |  427  |  428  |  429  |  
Iran  |  2,795  |  1,991  |  2,080  |  2,081  |  2,082  |  2,083  |  2,084  |  
Iraq  |  176  |  176  |  176  |  176  |  177  |  177  |  178  |  
Israel  |  108  |  96  |  96  |  96  |  97  |  98  |  98  |  
Jordan  |  190  |  213  |  213  |  213  |  213  |  213  |  213  |  
Kuwait  |  523  |  705  |  707  |  710  |  712  |  714  |  717  |  
Oman  |  1,655  |  1,909  |  1,913  |  1,918  |  1,922  |  1,927  |  1,932  |  
Qatar  |  2,861  |  2,459  |  2,788  |  3,097  |  3,097  |  3,097  |  3,097  |  



Appendix D-114  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Saudi Arabia  |  2,574  |  2,248  |  2,919  |  3,362  |  3,572  |  3,647  |  3,724  |  
Syria  |  93  |  22  |  12  |  21  |  20  |  20  |  19  |  
Turkey  |  1,225  |  1,068  |  1,137  |  1,208  |  1,207  |  1,254  |  1,288  |  
UAE  |  628  |  967  |  1,034  |  1,060  |  1,088  |  1,116  |  1,145  |  
South Asia Total  |  18,604  |  19,121  |  19,432  |  19,876  |  19,924  |  19,945  |  19,954  |  
Afghanistan  |  22  |  24  |  24  |  24  |  24  |  24  |  24  |  
Bangladesh  |  799  |  863  |  852  |  928  |  928  |  928  |  928  |  
India  |  14,920  |  14,910  |  15,271  |  15,643  |  15,701  |  15,732  |  15,741  |  
Pakistan  |  2,863  |  3,324  |  3,284  |  3,280  |  3,270  |  3,261  |  3,261  |  
South-East Asia Total  |  7,401  |  7,474  |  8,043  |  8,506  |  9,037  |  9,202  |  9,388  |  
Indonesia  |  4,845  |  4,720  |  5,031  |  5,202  |  5,434  |  5,563  |  5,695  |  
Malaysia  |  778  |  781  |  822  |  1,098  |  1,380  |  1,397  |  1,432  |  
Myanmar  |  118  |  96  |  96  |  96  |  96  |  96  |  96  |  
Philippines  |  119  |  116  |  117  |  117  |  118  |  119  |  119  |  
Thailand  |  330  |  311  |  318  |  330  |  343  |  356  |  370  |  
Vietnam  |  1,211  |  1,450  |  1,659  |  1,662  |  1,667  |  1,671  |  1,676  |  
East Asia Total  |  60,826  |  65,528  |  65,927  |  64,619  |  64,705  |  66,132  |  67,578  |  
China  |  57,635  |  62,365  |  62,747  |  61,391  |  61,437  |  62,804  |  64,206  |  
Japan  |  1,252  |  1,314  |  1,318  |  1,341  |  1,357  |  1,374  |  1,388  |  
North Korea  |  85  |  82  |  85  |  85  |  86  |  86  |  86  |  
South Korea  |  1,197  |  1,190  |  1,173  |  1,171  |  1,170  |  1,187  |  1,198  |  
Taiwan  |  656  |  577  |  604  |  630  |  656  |  682  |  701  |  
Oceania Total  |  1,563  |  1,365  |  1,484  |  1,560  |  1,626  |  1,678  |  1,673  |  
Oceania Total  |  1,563  |  1,365  |  1,484  |  1,560  |  1,626  |  1,678  |  1,673  |  
Australia  |  1,451  |  1,235  |  1,354  |  1,430  |  1,495  |  1,548  |  1,542  |  
New Zealand  |  112  |  130  |  130  |  130  |  130  |  130  |  130  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix D-115  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Appendix D-116  |  Confidential  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
World Total  |  171,401  |  172,987  |  176,707  |  180,809  |  185,058  |  189,131  |  192,952  |  
Europe & CIS Total  |  40,162  |  38,462  |  38,223  |  38,760  |  39,347  |  40,762  |  41,933  |  
West Europe Total  |  11,060  |  11,295  |  11,245  |  11,197  |  11,149  |  11,100  |  11,023  |  
Austria  |  481  |  443  |  450  |  458  |  465  |  473  |  481  |  
Belgium  |  975  |  1,058  |  1,039  |  1,021  |  1,003  |  986  |  968  |  
France  |  947  |  991  |  995  |  998  |  1,002  |  1,006  |  1,010  |  
Germany  |  3,371  |  3,339  |  3,324  |  3,309  |  3,295  |  3,280  |  3,265  |  
Greece  |  110  |  105  |  110  |  116  |  121  |  125  |  125  |  
Italy  |  728  |  700  |  706  |  713  |  720  |  727  |  734  |  
Netherlands  |  2,558  |  2,790  |  2,744  |  2,698  |  2,653  |  2,609  |  2,527  |  
Norway  |  378  |  354  |  357  |  361  |  364  |  368  |  371  |  
Spain  |  517  |  527  |  525  |  522  |  519  |  517  |  514  |  
Switzerland  |  40  |  26  |  28  |  30  |  30  |  30  |  29  |  
UK  |  956  |  962  |  966  |  971  |  976  |  981  |  999  |  
East Europe Total  |  11,955  |  9,324  |  9,497  |  9,358  |  9,240  |  9,412  |  9,475  |  
Bulgaria  |  425  |  376  |  387  |  399  |  412  |  424  |  438  |  
Croatia  |  427  |  414  |  411  |  408  |  405  |  403  |  400  |  
Czech Republic  |  255  |  186  |  195  |  205  |  215  |  226  |  237  |  
Georgia  |  202  |  220  |  220  |  221  |  221  |  221  |  221  |  
Hungary  |  466  |  381  |  395  |  395  |  390  |  395  |  400  |  
Lithuania  |  1,084  |  846  |  846  |  685  |  554  |  554  |  554  |  
Poland  |  2,455  |  2,613  |  2,588  |  2,471  |  2,447  |  2,471  |  2,447  |  
Romania  |  1,504  |  738  |  734  |  747  |  595  |  609  |  623  |  
Serbia  |  170  |  201  |  201  |  201  |  201  |  201  |  201  |  
Slovakia  |  377  |  451  |  429  |  408  |  387  |  368  |  350  |  
Ukraine  |  4,589  |  2,897  |  3,090  |  3,219  |  3,412  |  3,541  |  3,605  |  
CIS Total  |  17,146  |  17,843  |  17,481  |  18,204  |  18,959  |  20,250  |  21,435  |  
Azerbaijan  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  183  |  365  |  365  |  
Belarus  |  997  |  1,001  |  1,008  |  1,088  |  1,095  |  1,114  |  1,114  |  
Kazakhstan  |  106  |  90  |  86  |  84  |  84  |  84  |  84  |  
Russia  |  14,310  |  15,038  |  14,518  |  15,151  |  15,681  |  16,448  |  17,284  |  
Turkmenistan  |  408  |  455  |  607  |  615  |  623  |  928  |  1,244  |  
Uzbekistan  |  1,325  |  1,259  |  1,262  |  1,266  |  1,293  |  1,310  |  1,343  |  
Africa Total  |  5,308  |  4,536  |  5,339  |  6,195  |  7,232  |  8,134  |  8,599  |  
North Africa Total  |  4,447  |  3,739  |  4,530  |  5,159  |  5,468  |  5,690  |  6,027  |  
Algeria  |  1,004  |  1,012  |  1,408  |  1,804  |  1,804  |  1,804  |  1,864  |  
Egypt  |  3,166  |  2,435  |  2,633  |  2,779  |  3,088  |  3,302  |  3,579  |  
Libya  |  277  |  292  |  489  |  577  |  577  |  584  |  584  |  
East Africa Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
West Africa Total  |  236  |  176  |  189  |  416  |  1,146  |  1,828  |  1,956  |  
Nigeria  |  236  |  176  |  189  |  416  |  1,146  |  1,828  |  1,956  |  
Central Africa Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Southern Africa Total  |  625  |  621  |  620  |  619  |  618  |  617  |  616  |  
South Africa  |  625  |  621  |  620  |  619  |  618  |  617  |  616  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix E-117  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
North America Total  |  15,878  |  16,219  |  17,315  |  19,558  |  20,329  |  20,121  |  20,555  |  
North America Total  |  15,878  |  16,219  |  17,315  |  19,558  |  20,329  |  20,121  |  20,555  |  
Canada  |  4,626  |  4,454  |  4,433  |  4,447  |  4,462  |  4,441  |  4,447  |  
USA  |  11,252  |  11,765  |  12,883  |  15,111  |  15,867  |  15,680  |  16,109  |  
Central & South America Total  |  9,734  |  9,323  |  9,382  |  10,023  |  10,684  |  10,944  |  10,971  |  
Caribbean Total  |  5,656  |  5,137  |  4,906  |  4,906  |  4,892  |  4,906  |  4,906  |  
Trinidad  |  5,656  |  5,137  |  4,906  |  4,906  |  4,892  |  4,906  |  4,906  |  
Central America Total  |  748  |  1,104  |  1,239  |  1,394  |  1,394  |  1,394  |  1,394  |  
Mexico  |  748  |  1,104  |  1,239  |  1,394  |  1,394  |  1,394  |  1,394  |  
South America Total  |  3,330  |  3,082  |  3,237  |  3,723  |  4,398  |  4,644  |  4,671  |  
Argentina  |  752  |  766  |  805  |  809  |  805  |  859  |  895  |  
Bolivia  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  200  |  400  |  400  |  400  |  
Brazil  |  1,283  |  1,235  |  1,224  |  1,498  |  1,968  |  2,151  |  2,132  |  
Colombia  |  148  |  138  |  146  |  154  |  163  |  172  |  182  |  
Peru  |  14  |  15  |  15  |  14  |  14  |  14  |  14  |  
Venezuela  |  1,133  |  929  |  1,048  |  1,048  |  1,048  |  1,048  |  1,048  |  
Asia Total  |  98,218  |  102,544  |  104,515  |  104,313  |  105,476  |  107,149  |  108,842  |  
Middle East Total  |  15,269  |  14,284  |  15,068  |  15,336  |  15,970  |  16,290  |  16,519  |  
Bahrain  |  411  |  452  |  444  |  435  |  427  |  419  |  411  |  
Iran  |  3,175  |  2,664  |  2,710  |  2,756  |  2,756  |  2,526  |  2,526  |  
Iraq  |  176  |  168  |  170  |  171  |  172  |  174  |  175  |  
Kuwait  |  577  |  725  |  725  |  725  |  725  |  725  |  725  |  
Oman  |  1,960  |  2,141  |  2,115  |  2,090  |  2,064  |  2,039  |  2,015  |  
Qatar  |  3,438  |  3,048  |  3,296  |  3,473  |  3,544  |  3,580  |  3,651  |  
Saudi Arabia  |  4,017  |  3,627  |  4,054  |  4,054  |  4,576  |  5,045  |  5,152  |  
Syria  |  93  |  22  |  12  |  21  |  20  |  20  |  19  |  
Turkey  |  717  |  470  |  509  |  551  |  597  |  646  |  700  |  
UAE  |  704  |  967  |  1,034  |  1,060  |  1,088  |  1,116  |  1,145  |  
South Asia Total  |  16,713  |  17,321  |  17,623  |  18,019  |  18,022  |  18,025  |  18,038  |  
Afghanistan  |  22  |  24  |  24  |  23  |  23  |  22  |  22  |  
Bangladesh  |  838  |  902  |  920  |  995  |  995  |  995  |  995  |  
India  |  12,989  |  13,070  |  13,395  |  13,721  |  13,734  |  13,747  |  13,760  |  
Pakistan  |  2,863  |  3,324  |  3,284  |  3,280  |  3,270  |  3,261  |  3,261  |  
South-East Asia Total  |  7,848  |  7,665  |  8,160  |  8,639  |  9,111  |  9,085  |  9,124  |  
Indonesia  |  5,388  |  5,099  |  5,546  |  5,794  |  6,045  |  6,099  |  6,175  |  
Malaysia  |  1,217  |  1,181  |  1,157  |  1,439  |  1,708  |  1,674  |  1,682  |  
Myanmar  |  118  |  90  |  90  |  90  |  90  |  90  |  90  |  
Vietnam  |  1,125  |  1,295  |  1,366  |  1,316  |  1,268  |  1,222  |  1,177  |  
East Asia Total  |  58,388  |  63,273  |  63,665  |  62,318  |  62,373  |  63,750  |  65,161  |  
China  |  57,325  |  62,165  |  62,547  |  61,191  |  61,237  |  62,604  |  64,006  |  
Japan  |  978  |  1,023  |  1,032  |  1,042  |  1,051  |  1,061  |  1,071  |  
North Korea  |  85  |  85  |  85  |  85  |  85  |  85  |  85  |  



Appendix E-118  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Oceania Total  |  2,101  |  1,904  |  1,932  |  1,961  |  1,991  |  2,021  |  2,052  |  
Oceania Total  |  2,101  |  1,904  |  1,932  |  1,961  |  1,991  |  2,021  |  2,052  |  
Australia  |  1,988  |  1,778  |  1,810  |  1,842  |  1,875  |  1,909  |  1,943  |  
New Zealand  |  113  |  126  |  122  |  119  |  116  |  113  |  109  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix E-119  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Appendix E-120  |  Confidential  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
World Total  |  205,148  |  208,687  |  215,601  |  225,368  |  231,453  |  235,140  |  236,603  |  
Europe & CIS Total  |  46,484  |  46,684  |  47,234  |  47,923  |  48,996  |  50,553  |  51,375  |  
West Europe Total  |  12,007  |  12,007  |  12,007  |  12,007  |  12,007  |  12,007  |  12,007  |  
Austria  |  515  |  515  |  515  |  515  |  515  |  515  |  515  |  
Belgium  |  1,083  |  1,083  |  1,083  |  1,083  |  1,083  |  1,083  |  1,083  |  
France  |  1,347  |  1,347  |  1,347  |  1,347  |  1,347  |  1,347  |  1,347  |  
Germany  |  3,423  |  3,423  |  3,423  |  3,423  |  3,423  |  3,423  |  3,423  |  
Greece  |  150  |  150  |  150  |  150  |  150  |  150  |  150  |  
Italy  |  600  |  600  |  600  |  600  |  600  |  600  |  600  |  
Netherlands  |  2,632  |  2,632  |  2,632  |  2,632  |  2,632  |  2,632  |  2,632  |  
Norway  |  525  |  525  |  525  |  525  |  525  |  525  |  525  |  
Spain  |  594  |  594  |  594  |  594  |  594  |  594  |  594  |  
Switzerland  |  40  |  40  |  40  |  40  |  40  |  40  |  40  |  
United Kingdom  |  1,098  |  1,098  |  1,098  |  1,098  |  1,098  |  1,098  |  1,098  |  
East Europe Total  |  16,074  |  16,074  |  16,074  |  16,074  |  16,074  |  16,074  |  16,074  |  
Bosnia & Herzegovina  |  33  |  33  |  33  |  33  |  33  |  33  |  33  |  
Bulgaria  |  625  |  625  |  625  |  625  |  625  |  625  |  625  |  
Croatia  |  449  |  449  |  449  |  449  |  449  |  449  |  449  |  
Czech Republic  |  347  |  347  |  347  |  347  |  347  |  347  |  347  |  
Estonia  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  
Georgia  |  400  |  400  |  400  |  400  |  400  |  400  |  400  |  
Hungary  |  476  |  476  |  476  |  476  |  476  |  476  |  476  |  
Lithuania  |  1,007  |  1,007  |  1,007  |  1,007  |  1,007  |  1,007  |  1,007  |  
Poland  |  2,840  |  2,840  |  2,840  |  2,840  |  2,840  |  2,840  |  2,840  |  
Romania  |  2,430  |  2,430  |  2,430  |  2,430  |  2,430  |  2,430  |  2,430  |  
Serbia  |  300  |  300  |  300  |  300  |  300  |  300  |  300  |  
Slovakia  |  529  |  529  |  529  |  529  |  529  |  529  |  529  |  
Ukraine  |  6,438  |  6,438  |  6,438  |  6,438  |  6,438  |  6,438  |  6,438  |  
CIS Total  |  18,403  |  18,603  |  19,153  |  19,842  |  20,915  |  22,472  |  23,294  |  
Azerbaijan  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  203  |  406  |  406  |  
Belarus  |  1,061  |  1,061  |  1,061  |  1,061  |  1,061  |  1,061  |  1,061  |  
Kazakhstan  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  
Russia  |  14,743  |  14,743  |  15,093  |  15,782  |  16,652  |  17,656  |  18,128  |  
Tajikistan  |  122  |  122  |  122  |  122  |  122  |  122  |  122  |  
Turkmenistan  |  598  |  798  |  998  |  998  |  998  |  1,348  |  1,698  |  
Uzbekistan  |  1,679  |  1,679  |  1,679  |  1,679  |  1,679  |  1,679  |  1,679  |  
Africa Total  |  7,628  |  7,976  |  8,995  |  10,393  |  11,499  |  12,405  |  12,585  |  
North Africa Total  |  6,496  |  6,844  |  7,863  |  8,882  |  8,882  |  9,062  |  9,242  |  
Algeria  |  1,338  |  1,686  |  2,346  |  3,006  |  3,006  |  3,006  |  3,006  |  
Egypt  |  4,428  |  4,428  |  4,787  |  5,146  |  5,146  |  5,326  |  5,506  |  
Libya  |  730  |  730  |  730  |  730  |  730  |  730  |  730  |  
East Africa Total  |  103  |  103  |  103  |  103  |  103  |  103  |  103  |  
Zambia  |  103  |  103  |  103  |  103  |  103  |  103  |  103  |  
West Africa Total  |  363  |  363  |  363  |  743  |  1,848  |  2,574  |  2,574  |  
Nigeria  |  363  |  363  |  363  |  743  |  1,848  |  2,574  |  2,574  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix F-121  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Central Africa Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Southern Africa Total  |  666  |  666  |  666  |  666  |  666  |  666  |  666  |  
South Africa  |  666  |  666  |  666  |  666  |  666  |  666  |  666  |  
North America Total  |  17,310  |  17,534  |  18,912  |  20,861  |  21,433  |  21,433  |  21,808  |  
North America Total  |  17,310  |  17,534  |  18,912  |  20,861  |  21,433  |  21,433  |  21,808  |  
Canada  |  5,119  |  5,119  |  5,119  |  5,160  |  5,201  |  5,201  |  5,201  |  
United States  |  12,191  |  12,415  |  13,793  |  15,702  |  16,232  |  16,232  |  16,607  |  
Central & South America Total  |  11,348  |  12,013  |  12,604  |  13,167  |  13,990  |  14,249  |  14,249  |  
Caribbean Total  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  
Trinidad  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  5,772  |  
Central America Total  |  975  |  1,299  |  1,549  |  1,549  |  1,549  |  1,549  |  1,549  |  
Mexico  |  975  |  1,299  |  1,549  |  1,549  |  1,549  |  1,549  |  1,549  |  
South America Total  |  4,602  |  4,943  |  5,283  |  5,846  |  6,669  |  6,928  |  6,928  |  
Argentina  |  817  |  861  |  905  |  905  |  905  |  905  |  905  |  
Bolivia  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  200  |  400  |  400  |  400  |  
Brazil  |  1,547  |  1,547  |  1,547  |  1,910  |  2,532  |  2,792  |  2,792  |  
Colombia  |  181  |  181  |  181  |  181  |  181  |  181  |  181  |  
Peru  |  32  |  32  |  32  |  32  |  32  |  32  |  32  |  
Venezuela  |  2,025  |  2,322  |  2,619  |  2,619  |  2,619  |  2,619  |  2,619  |  
Asia Total  |  120,093  |  122,195  |  125,571  |  130,738  |  133,251  |  134,216  |  134,301  |  
Middle East Total  |  17,826  |  18,494  |  18,494  |  18,494  |  19,044  |  19,594  |  19,594  |  
Bahrain  |  396  |  396  |  396  |  396  |  396  |  396  |  396  |  
Iran  |  4,255  |  4,593  |  4,593  |  4,593  |  4,593  |  4,593  |  4,593  |  
Iraq  |  990  |  990  |  990  |  990  |  990  |  990  |  990  |  
Kuwait  |  740  |  740  |  740  |  740  |  740  |  740  |  740  |  
Oman  |  1,815  |  1,815  |  1,815  |  1,815  |  1,815  |  1,815  |  1,815  |  
Qatar  |  3,544  |  3,544  |  3,544  |  3,544  |  3,544  |  3,544  |  3,544  |  
Saudi Arabia  |  4,267  |  4,267  |  4,267  |  4,267  |  4,817  |  5,367  |  5,367  |  
Syria  |  380  |  380  |  380  |  380  |  380  |  380  |  380  |  
Turkey  |  680  |  680  |  680  |  680  |  680  |  680  |  680  |  
United Arab Emirates  |  759  |  1,089  |  1,089  |  1,089  |  1,089  |  1,089  |  1,089  |  
South Asia Total  |  21,629  |  21,724  |  22,252  |  22,780  |  22,780  |  22,780  |  22,780  |  
Afghanistan  |  70  |  70  |  70  |  70  |  70  |  70  |  70  |  
Bangladesh  |  1,880  |  1,880  |  2,045  |  2,210  |  2,210  |  2,210  |  2,210  |  
India  |  15,103  |  15,198  |  15,561  |  15,924  |  15,924  |  15,924  |  15,924  |  
Pakistan  |  4,576  |  4,576  |  4,576  |  4,576  |  4,576  |  4,576  |  4,576  |  
South-East Asia Total  |  9,776  |  10,056  |  10,224  |  11,533  |  12,231  |  11,901  |  11,901  |  
Indonesia  |  6,534  |  6,664  |  6,682  |  7,624  |  7,954  |  7,624  |  7,624  |  
Malaysia  |  1,367  |  1,367  |  1,367  |  1,735  |  2,102  |  2,102  |  2,102  |  
Myanmar  |  450  |  450  |  450  |  450  |  450  |  450  |  450  |  
Vietnam  |  1,425  |  1,575  |  1,725  |  1,725  |  1,725  |  1,725  |  1,725  |  
East Asia Total  |  70,862  |  71,921  |  74,601  |  77,931  |  79,196  |  79,941  |  80,026  |  
China  |  68,492  |  69,550  |  72,230  |  75,560  |  76,825  |  77,570  |  77,655  |  
Japan  |  1,416  |  1,416  |  1,416  |  1,416  |  1,416  |  1,416  |  1,416  |  
North Korea  |  955  |  955  |  955  |  955  |  955  |  955  |  955  |  



Appendix F-122  |  Confidential  |  



Ammonia Market Outlook  |  http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Oceania Total  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  
Oceania Total  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  2,285  |  
Australia  |  2,135  |  2,135  |  2,135  |  2,135  |  2,135  |  2,135  |  2,135  |  
New Zealand  |  150  |  150  |  150  |  150  |  150  |  150  |  150  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix F-123  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



Appendix F-124  |  Confidential  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
World Total  |  18,588  |  18,086  |  17,918  |  18,100  |  18,396  |  19,041  |  19,021  |  
Europe & CIS Total  |  3,904  |  4,772  |  4,734  |  4,719  |  4,752  |  4,824  |  4,904  |  
West Europe Total  |  3,535  |  4,269  |  4,213  |  4,242  |  4,273  |  4,338  |  4,406  |  
Austria  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  
Belgium  |  700  |  881  |  838  |  862  |  885  |  907  |  933  |  
Denmark  |  27  |  34  |  34  |  35  |  35  |  36  |  36  |  
Finland  |  340  |  367  |  367  |  367  |  368  |  369  |  370  |  
France  |  703  |  828  |  817  |  810  |  800  |  790  |  781  |  
Germany  |  374  |  735  |  723  |  721  |  698  |  713  |  730  |  
Greece  |  0  |  28  |  29  |  29  |  30  |  33  |  41  |  
Italy  |  37  |  26  |  21  |  17  |  13  |  9  |  6  |  
Malta  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Netherlands  |  135  |  135  |  135  |  135  |  135  |  135  |  135  |  
Norway  |  373  |  323  |  320  |  316  |  313  |  310  |  306  |  
Portugal  |  137  |  152  |  154  |  157  |  160  |  164  |  167  |  
Spain  |  416  |  368  |  384  |  402  |  426  |  446  |  470  |  
Sweden  |  224  |  325  |  328  |  330  |  349  |  368  |  371  |  
Switzerland  |  8  |  6  |  3  |  1  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
UK  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  
East Europe Total  |  368  |  457  |  469  |  419  |  418  |  430  |  441  |  
Bosnia & Herzegovina  |  0  |  18  |  18  |  18  |  18  |  18  |  18  |  
Czech Republic  |  151  |  143  |  135  |  125  |  114  |  103  |  92  |  
Estonia  |  15  |  55  |  55  |  55  |  55  |  55  |  55  |  
Lithuania  |  180  |  172  |  168  |  104  |  91  |  91  |  91  |  
Poland  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  
Slovakia  |  9  |  57  |  82  |  106  |  129  |  151  |  172  |  
Slovenia  |  4  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  
CIS Total  |  1  |  47  |  53  |  58  |  60  |  55  |  58  |  
Kazakhstan  |  1  |  47  |  53  |  58  |  60  |  55  |  58  |  
Africa Total  |  1,131  |  1,195  |  1,360  |  1,325  |  1,476  |  1,579  |  1,658  |  
North Africa Total  |  934  |  990  |  1,145  |  1,102  |  1,244  |  1,354  |  1,429  |  
Morocco  |  682  |  694  |  788  |  721  |  863  |  973  |  1,048  |  
Tunisia  |  252  |  296  |  358  |  381  |  381  |  381  |  381  |  
East Africa Total  |  52  |  50  |  55  |  61  |  66  |  66  |  66  |  
Madagascar  |  15  |  14  |  19  |  24  |  29  |  29  |  30  |  
Zimbabwe  |  36  |  37  |  37  |  37  |  37  |  37  |  37  |  
West Africa Total  |  0  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  
Senegal  |  0  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  11  |  
Central Africa Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Southern Africa Total  |  146  |  144  |  148  |  152  |  155  |  148  |  152  |  
Namibia  |  0  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  
South Africa  |  146  |  144  |  147  |  151  |  155  |  148  |  152  |  
North America Total  |  6,082  |  5,001  |  4,462  |  4,279  |  4,479  |  4,935  |  4,614  |  
North America Total  |  6,082  |  5,001  |  4,462  |  4,279  |  4,479  |  4,935  |  4,614  |  
Canada  |  25  |  25  |  25  |  25  |  25  |  25  |  25  |  
USA  |  6,057  |  4,976  |  4,437  |  4,254  |  4,454  |  4,910  |  4,589  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix G-125  |  



http://mycru.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Market Outlook  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Central & South America Total  |  1,151  |  902  |  927  |  1,158  |  973  |  855  |  918  |  
Caribbean Total  |  67  |  73  |  73  |  74  |  75  |  76  |  77  |  
Cuba  |  17  |  23  |  23  |  24  |  25  |  26  |  27  |  
Others  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  
Central America Total  |  350  |  5  |  20  |  187  |  189  |  204  |  210  |  
Mexico  |  350  |  5  |  20  |  187  |  189  |  204  |  210  |  
South America Total  |  734  |  824  |  834  |  897  |  709  |  575  |  631  |  
Brazil  |  327  |  403  |  378  |  372  |  192  |  69  |  116  |  
Chile  |  342  |  369  |  413  |  490  |  490  |  489  |  507  |  
Colombia  |  64  |  49  |  41  |  33  |  25  |  15  |  6  |  
Peru  |  1  |  2  |  2  |  2  |  1  |  1  |  1  |  
Asia Total  |  6,145  |  6,036  |  6,251  |  6,431  |  6,526  |  6,655  |  6,731  |  
Middle East Total  |  982  |  1,089  |  1,118  |  1,147  |  1,101  |  1,097  |  1,077  |  
Iraq  |  0  |  7  |  6  |  5  |  5  |  4  |  3  |  
Israel  |  108  |  96  |  96  |  96  |  97  |  98  |  98  |  
Jordan  |  190  |  213  |  213  |  213  |  213  |  213  |  213  |  
Turkey  |  684  |  773  |  803  |  833  |  786  |  783  |  763  |  
South Asia Total  |  1,931  |  1,840  |  1,877  |  1,924  |  1,969  |  1,987  |  1,983  |  
Afghanistan  |  0  |  0  |  1  |  1  |  2  |  2  |  2  |  
India  |  1,931  |  1,840  |  1,876  |  1,923  |  1,967  |  1,985  |  1,981  |  
South-East Asia Total  |  795  |  849  |  993  |  1,060  |  1,125  |  1,190  |  1,254  |  
Indonesia  |  250  |  250  |  250  |  250  |  250  |  250  |  250  |  
Malaysia  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  
Myanmar  |  0  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  6  |  
Philippines  |  119  |  116  |  117  |  117  |  118  |  119  |  119  |  
Thailand  |  330  |  311  |  318  |  330  |  343  |  356  |  370  |  
Vietnam  |  86  |  155  |  292  |  346  |  399  |  449  |  499  |  
East Asia Total  |  2,437  |  2,258  |  2,262  |  2,301  |  2,332  |  2,382  |  2,416  |  
China  |  310  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  200  |  
Japan  |  274  |  291  |  286  |  300  |  306  |  313  |  317  |  
South Korea  |  1,197  |  1,190  |  1,173  |  1,171  |  1,170  |  1,187  |  1,198  |  
Taiwan  |  656  |  577  |  604  |  630  |  656  |  682  |  701  |  
Oceania Total  |  175  |  180  |  183  |  186  |  190  |  193  |  196  |  
Oceania Total  |  175  |  180  |  183  |  186  |  190  |  193  |  196  |  
Australia  |  175  |  175  |  175  |  175  |  175  |  175  |  175  |  
New Zealand  |  0  |  5  |  8  |  11  |  15  |  18  |  21  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  



Appendix G-126  |  Confidential  |  



   |  2013  |  2014  |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
World Total  |  18,587  |  18,088  |  17,919  |  18,101  |  18,388  |  19,032  |  19,020  |  
Europe & CIS Total  |  5,880  |  6,296  |  6,431  |  6,973  |  7,106  |  7,586  |  7,410  |  
West Europe Total  |  925  |  1,394  |  1,309  |  1,326  |  1,390  |  1,342  |  1,295  |  
Austria  |  11  |  77  |  80  |  83  |  85  |  88  |  91  |  
Belgium  |  25  |  165  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  
France  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  
Germany  |  350  |  350  |  350  |  350  |  350  |  350  |  350  |  
Netherlands  |  188  |  411  |  385  |  398  |  458  |  407  |  341  |  
Spain  |  75  |  75  |  75  |  75  |  75  |  75  |  75  |  
UK  |  226  |  266  |  269  |  270  |  271  |  272  |  288  |  
East Europe Total  |  1,521  |  899  |  1,132  |  1,217  |  1,096  |  1,160  |  1,116  |  
Bulgaria  |  5  |  9  |  20  |  32  |  44  |  57  |  70  |  
Croatia  |  0  |  33  |  15  |  12  |  9  |  6  |  3  |  
Czech Republic  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  
Hungary  |  2  |  10  |  17  |  15  |  12  |  19  |  26  |  
Lithuania  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  5  |  
Poland  |  142  |  126  |  137  |  189  |  146  |  165  |  138  |  
Romania  |  5  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Serbia  |  45  |  34  |  30  |  30  |  30  |  30  |  30  |  
Slovakia  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  
Ukraine  |  1,294  |  663  |  887  |  915  |  829  |  858  |  823  |  
CIS Total  |  3,435  |  4,003  |  3,990  |  4,430  |  4,620  |  5,084  |  4,999  |  
Belarus  |  11  |  4  |  0  |  0  |  17  |  25  |  12  |  
Russia  |  3,401  |  3,974  |  3,966  |  4,419  |  4,590  |  5,054  |  4,974  |  
Uzbekistan  |  22  |  25  |  23  |  11  |  13  |  5  |  13  |  
Africa Total  |  1,078  |  918  |  1,138  |  1,237  |  1,146  |  1,339  |  1,506  |  
North Africa Total  |  1,014  |  853  |  1,069  |  1,173  |  1,072  |  1,138  |  1,280  |  
Algeria  |  780  |  613  |  649  |  575  |  269  |  269  |  206  |  
Egypt  |  159  |  138  |  123  |  214  |  418  |  478  |  683  |  
Libya  |  75  |  102  |  296  |  384  |  384  |  391  |  391  |  
East Africa Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
West Africa Total  |  54  |  55  |  59  |  53  |  64  |  191  |  216  |  
Nigeria  |  54  |  55  |  59  |  53  |  64  |  191  |  216  |  
Central Africa Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Southern Africa Total  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  
South Africa  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  
North America Total  |  1,303  |  978  |  996  |  1,004  |  971  |  894  |  885  |  
North America Total  |  1,303  |  978  |  996  |  1,004  |  971  |  894  |  885  |  
Canada  |  1,253  |  928  |  946  |  954  |  921  |  844  |  835  |  
USA  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  50  |  
Central & South America Total  |  5,264  |  5,002  |  4,859  |  4,926  |  4,889  |  4,916  |  4,896  |  
Caribbean Total  |  4,747  |  4,365  |  4,123  |  4,145  |  4,166  |  4,180  |  4,180  |  
Trinidad  |  4,747  |  4,365  |  4,123  |  4,145  |  4,166  |  4,180  |  4,180  |  
Central America Total  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  
Mexico  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  100  |  
South America Total  |  418  |  536  |  636  |  681  |  623  |  636  |  615  |  
Argentina  |  48  |  115  |  115  |  100  |  68  |  81  |  61  |  



Confidential  |  Appendix H-127  |  



Bolivia  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  106  |  80  |  80  |  80  |  
Brazil  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  20  |  
Colombia  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  10  |  
Venezuela  |  339  |  391  |  491  |  446  |  445  |  445  |  444  |  
Asia Total  |  4,348  |  4,176  |  3,864  |  3,374  |  3,722  |  3,761  |  3,748  |  
Middle East Total  |  3,067  |  3,096  |  2,686  |  2,114  |  2,455  |  2,621  |  2,690  |  
Bahrain  |  57  |  28  |  18  |  9  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Iran  |  380  |  673  |  630  |  675  |  674  |  443  |  442  |  
Kuwait  |  54  |  20  |  18  |  15  |  13  |  11  |  9  |  
Oman  |  305  |  233  |  202  |  172  |  142  |  112  |  83  |  
Qatar  |  577  |  589  |  509  |  376  |  447  |  483  |  553  |  
Saudi Arabia  |  1,443  |  1,379  |  1,134  |  691  |  1,004  |  1,397  |  1,428  |  
Turkey  |  175  |  175  |  175  |  175  |  175  |  175  |  175  |  
UAE  |  75  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
South Asia Total  |  39  |  40  |  68  |  67  |  67  |  67  |  67  |  
Bangladesh  |  39  |  40  |  68  |  67  |  67  |  67  |  67  |  
South-East Asia Total  |  1,242  |  1,040  |  1,110  |  1,193  |  1,200  |  1,073  |  991  |  
Indonesia  |  794  |  629  |  765  |  842  |  861  |  786  |  731  |  
Malaysia  |  449  |  411  |  345  |  351  |  338  |  286  |  260  |  
East Asia Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Oceania Total  |  713  |  719  |  631  |  587  |  555  |  536  |  576  |  
Oceania Total  |  713  |  719  |  631  |  587  |  555  |  536  |  576  |  
Australia  |  713  |  719  |  631  |  587  |  555  |  536  |  576  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  
Unidentified Total  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  



Appendix H-128  |  Confidential  |  



