28 May | 2015
Granular Bulk CFR
www.crugroup.comWeekly Overview Report | 2
Standard Bulk FOB
www.crugroup.comWeekly Overview Report | 3
Bulk DEL
www.crugroup.comWeekly Overview Report | 4
TSP
Granular Bulk FOB
www.crugroup.comWeekly Overview Report | 5
Spot
POTASH
Standard Bulk FOB
www.crugroup.comWeekly Overview Report | 6
Notes: (1) Indicative Price (2) No Market (3) No Recent Business (4) Mediterranean (excl. domestic contracts) Spot covers volumes less than 10K mt; Mediterranean (incl. North Africa) Spot covers quantities over 10K mt; NW Europe H2 2014 - truckload Contract and Benelux H2 2014 - barge/railcar Contract reflect latest quart
WEEKLY FREIGHTS
UAN
Notes: (1) While FW takes all reasonable efforts to ensure the reliability of the data, it does not guarantee its accuracy nor take liability for any direct,
indirect or consequential loss arising from any use of the data. Freight rates are supplied by Bery Maritime: + 47 23 11 35 00 (Norway) / +86 755 2689 7049
(China) / +65 6236 2580 (Singapore) / E-mail: bery@bery.no. While Bery Maritime makes all reasonable efforts to ensure the reliability of the data, it does not guarantee its accuracy nor take liability for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from any use of the data.
28 May | 2015
Notes: (1) Freight rates are supplied by Bery Maritime: + 47 23 11 35 00 (Norway) / +86 755 2689 7049 (China) / +65 6236 2580 (Singapore) / E-mail: bery@bery.no. While Bery Maritime makes all reasonable efforts to ensure the reliability of the data, it does not guarantee its accuracy nor take liability for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from any use of the data.
ANALYSIS
Pakistan at centre of attention ahead of tenders
Producers and traders that have been busy preparing for the two TCP tenders closing May 29 and June 1 will be keenly following the sessions to seek more clarity in the urea market which is currently dominated more by bulls than bears.
The tenders will provide a better understanding of traders' perceptions of the prompt market, and will also be a significant test for regional delivered values for Chinese and Middle East product. High Chinese prices for prills, quoted well above $300/mt FOB for June would imply netbacks some $10/mt higher for Middle East producers, potentially reducing availability for the US and Brazil accordingly.
Bullish sentiment on the spot market for prilled and granular urea did also prevail as participants in the 83rd annual IFA Conference gathered in Istanbul this week, but some more caution did emerge, even for the shorter term.
The more bearish outlook for Black Sea urea was however dampened substantially via May 28 news that CherkassyAzot is one of the Group DF plants to close following the decision by DF to suspend production at all Ukrainian units. While the Cherkassy urea output has been limited to less than 50,000 mt/month lately, the decision will likely have a significant psychological impact on the short term regional urea market.
Surging values for granular urea in the US came to a halt as the IFA Conference was ending, with bargeloads changing hands up to $30/st off recent peaks. The driver at New Orleans is flooding in the Arkansas River markets that will make some June arrivals competitive while barge traffic waits to move north and west again. Furthermore, the timing of the delay means the inevitable end to the seasonal bull market for barges probably has moved to the start of June, rather than the end of the month. On the other hand, the sudden shortage in the largest urea consuming market in the US has added $5-20/st to truck prices in the Southern Plains this week.
European distributors were meanwhile struggling to keep up with immediate demand, and spot trades in inland positions in Italy moved up sharply on pockets of demand that needed to be covered.
Forward prices in Europe are nevertheless in line with numbers posted in recent weeks, and buyers maintain a relaxed attitude on availability and showed no intentions of stocking up at prevailing prices.
Similar sentiment was also evident in Brazil where buyers continue to reject quotes based on prior sales by Middle East producers above $310/mt FOB. Indications of possible interest reflect returns some $10-15/mt
lower, but potential sales by Middle East producers in Pakistan might alter the approach by the Brazilian importers.
Highlights of the week
∙Group DF suspends urea output from Cherkassy Azot
∙US granular may be coming off their seasonal peak
∙Producers and traders prepare for TCP tenders in Pakistan
∙STC likely to float Indian urea tender early June
∙Netbacks in Egypt inch higher
∙Brazilian importers still reject high offers
∙Chinese suppliers maintain hard line on exports
Short term outlook
Mixed. Many signs point to significant downward adjustments in prices, but uncertainty over the duration of the cutbacks in Chinese export volumes and the suspension of Group DF exports attract sufficient attention to conceivably support prices well into June.
MARKETS
UREA
NORTH AMERICA
US Midwest: Too wet for field work, prices unchanged
Prices were unchanged but relatively little field work has occurred this week due to wet weather over the prior couple of weeks. Quotes for granular urea remain at $370-375/st FOB Midwest from river terminals and inland warehouses. Demand may benefit in coming weeks as some farmers give more consideration to urea and UAN instead of ammonia due to ground conditions.
US NOLA: Market turns midweek, floods block barges
After holding its ground around $355/st FOB New Orleans, granular urea barges lost almost $30/st late May 27 and May 28 as barge movement up the Arkansas River was substantially blocked by high water from flooding in Texas and Oklahoma.
Business was concluded around $355/st FOB early in the week. However, offers at $345/st FOB, $340/st FOB, $338/st FOB and $337/st FOB were reported and business was confirmed as low as $325/st FOB for prompt barges in the US Gulf. While floods are pulling back in the US interior, the delay moving up the
Arkansas River means barges discharging in coming days can now compete for enduser business previously limited to barges already loaded in the Gulf.
US S Plains: Flooding boosts warehouse values
Deadly flooding in Texas and Oklahoma is extending the halt to field work that wiped out most regional activity last week. At press time there was no word from the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) over when or where the agency might close traffic on the Arkansas River due to high and fast moving water.
However, barge carriers were not adding tows to the river's lineup. This in turn enabled warehouse sellers to boost demands for spot trucks to $370-390/st FOB throughout the region. Some distributors are scrambling to meet commitments tied to barges unable to move up the Arkansas River.
At press time, local media in Oklahoma and Arkansas reported water was falling from levels up to 10 feet above flood stage at some river ports and terminals.
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA
Brazil: Buyers still reject high quotes for granular urea
Brazilian buyers are maintaining that prospects for a softer forward market for granular urea are such that purchases of forward positions as offered in the $330s/mt CFR are not viable. Indications of buying interest circulating in Istanbul were in the upper $310s/mt CFR, and buyers were in no rush to conclude.
FORMER SOVIET UNION (FSU)
Baltic Sea: EuroChem books Salavat granular urea
EuroChem booked a total of 26,000 mt granular urea to load end June/early July in the May 27 Salavat tender originally floated for the sale of 20,000 mt to load early July. The exact price in the transaction was not released, but local reports suggest that the deal was struck around $315/mt FOB.
Prills are on offer at $288-293/mt FOB depending on quantity, loadport and time of loading, but buying interest remains subdued. Traders are thus far unwilling to assume forward length and netbacks on open business in Latin America are below the $285/mt FOB marker.
Black Sea: Prices stable week on week
The IFA conference in Istanbul did not serve as a platform for further substantial increases in Black Sea prices for prills, but news of Group DF suspension of output from its Ukrainian plants could trigger additional price increases. The suspension includes urea from Cherkassy Azot.
Limited trades in Turkey were indicative of netbacks around the $285/mt FOB marker. Quotes from producers are no lower than $292-294/mt FOB, but widespread reports of sales by OPZ at $290-291/mt FOB
for June loading could not be confirmed. The suggested deals have therefore not be included in the range posted for the week.
While the duration of the closure of urea output from Cherkassy remains uncertain, the loss of close
to 50,000 mt urea per month from the Black Sea will be significant for nearby markets such as Turkey and Italy where NF Trading has been feeding its distribution network.
Shipments in May from Yuzhnyy/TIS appear set to pan out a little short of 150,000 mt, including about 30,000 mt for Egypt and 30,000 mt for Mexico, destinations that have not been featuring notably from Yuzhnyy since quite some time.
MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA
Egypt: OCI suggested as buyer of MOPCO parcel
OCI is now suggested as the buyer of the 3,000 mt granular urea sold by MOPCO pursuant to the May 21 tender at $320/mt FOB for prompt lifting.
INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
India: STC in line for new tender in June
Indian importer STC is expected to float a new tender for urea to complement the relatively limited 775,000 mt procured by IPL via the May 9 session. The new tender for an unspecified quantity of urea is expected out in the first week of June, and will likely permit shipment through Agust 15-20.
The Department of Fertilizers will be keenly watching offers in the TCP tenders in Pakistan closing May 29 and June 1 for guidance on pricing in the region.
Sri Lanka: MoA to tender for urea June 9
Sri Lanka's Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) is to tender on June 9 for 36,000 mt granular urea plus 18,000 mt prilled or granular urea.
The full quantity is to be available for distribution in bags in Colombo in August, implying shipment by the end of July/early August if loaded from China and the Middle East. The tender will provide an indication of traders' and producers' perceptions of the forward market for both urea grades.
Pakistan: ECC clears additional imports
Pakistan's Economic Co-ordination Committee (ECC) has finally cleared the import of a further 150,000t of urea for Kharif application. The ECC clearance has been pending since the Fertilizer Review Committee recommended the additional imports in early April.
The tenders will follow the two sessions by Trading Corporation of Pakistan (TCP) set to close May 29 and June 1 for 50,000 mt each. The 150,000 mt requirement is expected to be split into three separate TCP tenders for 50,000 mt each, likely to close late June, allowing for shipment by July 20-25.
ASIA AND OCEANIA
South Korea: Dongbu, Namhae testing regional prices
Dongbu is reported to have taken an additional 4-5,000 mt granular urea from China marginally below $325/mt CFR, suggesting a netback to the seller around $305/mt FOB from China.
Ameropa was widely associated with the deal. Namhae was in discussions with suppliers in Istanbul for a parcel of about 6,000 mt granular urea for late June delivery, but a deal had yet to be confirmed at press time.
Indonesia: Kaltim V production improving
While production of ammonia at the facility is up to about 75% of rated capacity, output of granular urea from Kaltim V is currently running at about 45% of the unit's rated 3,500 mt/day capacity due to technical issues. The producer has not indicated a date for completion of the repairs currently being made to the plant.
Thailand: Buyers yet to concede higher granular prices
Importers in Thailand are yet to give in to demands from sellers for prices above $330/mt CFR and cite renewed approaches from traders offering Iranian granular urea.
While up on last week's $305/mt CFR deal, offers at $310-312/mt CFR for Iranian material are suggested in support of calls for lower offers from traditional sources. Contract cargoes priced via formulae are suggested arriving around an even $320/mt CFR, but suppliers are pushing hard for better returns.
China: Urea values up, domestic may be near peak
Domestic values for prilled and granular urea in China firmed further this week as local distributors continued purchasing in preparation for the peak application season for corn. Prills for prompt export were again sold close to $300/mt FOB to traders short for India at netbacks some $12-14/mt lower, with offers for June closer to $305/mt FOB.
Offers for granular urea for export are maintained well above $310/mt for regular Chinese quality, and above $320/mt FOB for premium product.
Offers at high prices did however slow activity somewhat as acceptance of the higher numbers at retail level is yet to be fully tested. Estimates on availability versus demand differ substantially, and a more cautious approach has been noted.
Mainstream domestic trades in prills at RMB 1,680-1,700/mt ($271-274/mt) EXW in northern China were up by RMB 30-50/mt ($5-8/mt) on last week. Similar increases were also recorded in Shanxi where product traded at RMB 1,620-1,650/mt ($261-266/mt) FCA.
Domestic buyers are competing for the prilled product with local traders buying for export as high as RMB 1,730/mt CPT into main ports, indicative of export values around $304/mt FOB plus provisions for margins to exporters.
Domestic values for granular urea for export were up to RMB 1,780/mt CPT northern ports, indicative of an export price at $312/mt FOB, also without provisions for margins. Offers circulating May 28 were above RMB 1,800/mt CPT.
Inventories in ports for export are down on last week. Yantai inventory is assessed at 220,000 mt this week compared to 300,000 mt last week. The inventory consists of about 130,000 mt granular urea and 90,000 mt prills. Arrivals into the port have slowed to about 10,000 mt/day.
Indonesia: Kaltim fails to achieve target-price
The May 22 tender for the sale of 30,000 mt granular urea from Kaltim to load by June 15 that had been restricted to a limited number of participants attracted one bid only, at $305/mt FOB Bontang.
The producer had been targeting netbacks in excess of the $311-311.50/mt FOB concluded with Fertcomm and Ameropa for 30,000 mt each in prior sessions, and is currently in discussions with traders, attempting to secure an improvement in pricing for the cargo still available. A further cargo of around 30,000 mt is also being discussed for later loading.
China: April urea exports close to 850,000 mt
April exports of urea from China were limited to about 850,000 mt, down sharply on the 1.31 million mt exported in April 2014.
The drop in volume reflects the firmer stance against low prices adopted by the China Nitrogen Fertilizer Industry Association that triggered rejections of bids from traders at levels below returns available in the domestic market.
The April volume did nevertheless lift January-April exports to about 5.28 million mt, still some
61% ahead of the 3.27 million mt exported in the first four months of 2014. May 2015 exports are also predicted relatively low, likely in line with the 545,000 mt exported in May 2014.
Lars Taarland, Editor – Global
Tel: +47 5156 4869
Email: lars.taarland@crugroup.com
BK Morris, Writer – North America
Tel: +1 240 965 7669
Email: bk.morris@crugroup.com
Gavin Ju, Contributor – China
Tel: +86 10 6510 2206
Email: gavin.ju@crugroup.com
Deepak Chitroda, Contributor – India
Tel: +91 22 66875713
Email: deepak.chitroda@crugroup.com
Ben Farey, Editor in Chief
Direct Tel: +44 (0) 207 903 2015
Mobile: +44 (0) 7885557034
Email: ben.farey@crugroup.com
Subscriptions & Customer Services
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2146
Email: customer.services@crugroup.com
Legal Copyright Notice © 2015 CRU International Ltd
Please note: Access to and use of this product are restricted by copyright and other law to named authorised users of companies with valid licences to do so. Any other use is prohibited. The copyright of this product is held by CRU International Ltd. It is a breach of law to forward/share this product or any of its contents, including but not limited to, single prices to any person, whether in your company or otherwise, unless that person is an authorised user under a valid licence.
The commission of any unauthorised act in relation to this product may result in civil or criminal actions.
Disclaimer:
While all reasonable efforts are taken to ensure the reliability of the fertilizer pricing and freight pricing data, FW does not guarantee its accuracy or take liability for the results obtained by using the data.
Using FW prices in contracts: Many subscribers to Fertilizer Week use Fertilizer Week benchmark prices in their contracts. When both sides in a business arrangement agree in advance to use a set of prices it creates more certainty and saves everyone time – as long as the prices can be relied upon. Fertilizer Week publishes a regularly updated methodology document with detailed definitions of every price we publish. By understanding how we calculate our prices, you will be able to build your own scenarios based on these prices
For more detail on methodology view our Pricing Methodology Guide
CRU International Ltd. Registered in England No 940750.
Registered Office: Charles House, 108-110 Finchley Road, London, NW3 5JJ.
Tel: + 44 20 7903 2000 Fax: +44 20 7837 0976
www.crugroup.com
28 May | 2015
Notes: (1) While FW makes all reasonable efforts to ensure the reliability of the data, it does not guarantee its accuracy nor take liability for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from any use of the data.
ANALYSIS
CF Industries sells large UAN quantity into France
UAN
UAN discussions at this week’s IFA conference were focused how much CF will sell into Europe over the summer months.
At press time CF had sold as much as 100,000 mt UAN-32 into Rouen to Invivo with the first 35,000 mt shipment already fixed. Business was reported concluded at about $180/mt FOB US Gulf ($160/st FOB barge New Orleans equivalent). Given freight estimates of around $35/mt and current euro/dollar exchange rates this would translate to about €194/mt FCA for UAN-30 loading from tanks in France, plus provisions for margins and carrying costs. Smaller forward sales of UAN-30 into France have been concluded at €192/mt FCA.
Little other UAN is reported available with Abu Qir yet to issue another export tender. GrodnoAzot also reportedly scrapped its May 22 tender for 25,000 mt UAN-32.
Despite the CF export business to France and Argentina, US UAN values have not firmed and inland distributors report US producers are responding rapidly to prompt demand for more UAN.
Ammonium sulphate
Demand from Brazil remains one of the few AS market drivers with supplier offers still reported at $160- 170/mt CFR. Recent further declines in corn prices and difficulties getting credit in the country have stalled potential purchases for the time being though. Caprolactam grade product offers are reported at $160- 170/mt CFR while granular AS is nearer $220-230/mt CFR.
TCCC will likely soon issue another AS import tender for 6,000 mt. Current prices for Chinese caprolactam grade product for Thailand are pegged at $150/mt CFR providing netbacks around $130/mt FOB.
Ammonium nitrate/CAN
The May 26 Yara annnouncement of a €50/mt drop in the price for CAN for new season deliveries in Germany to €225/mt CIF highlighted an otherwise slow week in trading in solid nitrates. While so far not announced by Yara, the price for Germany will also apply for deliveries in Benelux.
Exports of AN from the FSU remain limited, but a slight uptick in netbacks was evident over the week despite the concerns on financing in Brazil as highlighted in the above.
Importers in Turkey cite offers for AN at attractive forward prices, and may opt to purchase early rather than wait for the traditional summer lull basis prices indicated by sellers that reflect netbacks to FSU producers substantially below current numbers.
MARKETS
UAN
NORTH AMERICA
US NOLA: Market mostly watching with CF exports
Domestic barge trades were thin this week for UAN-32, leaving most of the market to focus on recent CF Industries' export commitments of around 130,000 mt. Traders report that 100,000 mt is committed to France, while the 30,000 mt balance is covering a sale to Argentina. Indications based on enduser values in those markets suggest a net to the producer of about $180/mt FOB US Gulf or roughly the equivalent of $160/st FOB in a barge, allowing for loading costs.
While this is far less than recent spot domestic business around $240/st FOB New Orleans, CF is expected to increasingly participate in the export market to balance its supply against increasing output from other US inland producers, including the OCI plant under construction in Iowa.
US Midwest: UAN demand steady but application delay
The US Midwest region has been wet throughout much of May, but has not suffered through the flooding reported in many states to the south. However, overall movement of all products is down as much as 40% in some areas compared to historical averages for the month. However, none of this is worrisome to distributors as they fully expect to make up sales during June. Even though little UAN has been used in the region, distributors report retailers are ordering more than expected in many areas.
UAN pricing in the remains at $9.22-9.63/unit FOB. UAN demand is benefitting from the recent wet weather, as much of the corn ground remains too soggy for ammonia application equipment. In addition, corn growth has been more rapid than in prior years. This week's US Department of Agriculture survey found 74% of the expected corn crop had emerged nationwide, compared to the five-year average of 62%. As the corn gets taller, ammonia application becomes less attractive and anecdotal evidence suggests farmers and retailers are buying more UAN and urea to ensure proper nitrogen applications in coming weeks for corn in the region.
FORMER SOVIET UNION (FSU)
Baltic: GrodnoAzot scraps latest UAN-32 export tender
GrodnoAzot reportedly scrapped its May 22 tender for 25,000 mt UAN-32. This follows the scrapping of its May 11 session for the same volume.
EUROPE
France: CF sells up to 100,000 mt UAN to Invivo
CF Industries has sold as much as 100,000 mt UAN-32 into Rouen to Invivo with the first 35,000 mt shipment already fixed. The business was reported concluded at about $180/mt FOB US Gulf ($160/st FOB barge New Orleans equivalent). Given freight estimates of around $35/mt and current euro/dollar exchange rates this would translate to about €194/mt FCA for UAN-30 loading from tanks in France, plus provisions for margins and carrying costs.
Small forward sales of UAN-30 into France have been concluded at €192/mt FCA with some sellers still holding back from concluding business in anticipation of selling at even higher prices in the coming month.
Netherlands: Prompt UAN business continues
Prompt sales of UAN continue to be made into the Netherlands with prices reported at an even €215/mt FCA.
MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA
Egypt: Next Abu Qir UAN-32 tender likely for June
Abu Qir has not yet issued another export tender. The supplier is thought to be waiting until sufficient tonnes are accumulated and for export licenses covering the month of June.
AS
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA
Brazil: AS business slow due to credit difficulties
Brazilian demand for AS is steadily increasing although recent further declines in corn prices and difficulties getting credit in the country have stalled potential purchases for the time being.
Latest production estimates for the country's corn crop continue to rise due to favourable weather, adding further to corn inventories and lower prices. With the cost of inputs continuing to rise and domestic corn prices hitting six months lows (according to the IGC), the next season's planted area is likely to decline possibly impacting future AS consumption. Concerns over Brazilian farmers' access to credit at preferential interest-rates was also a common theme at the annual IFA conference held in Istanbul this week.
Caprolactam grade product offers are reported at $160-170/mt CFR while granular AS is nearer $220-230/mt CFR.
ASIA AND OCEANIA
Thailand: TCCC may issue another AS tender soon
TCCC will likely soon issue another AS import tender for 6,000 mt. Current prices for Chinese caprolactam grade product for Thailand are pegged at $150/mt CFR.
AN
EUROPE
Turkey: Marketers indicate forward availability of AN
Marketers of ammonium nitrate have been approaching Turkish importers this week with indications of availablility as far forward as November and December at prices around $230/mt CFR with 180 days credit, duty paid.
Buyers have been counter-indicating some $15/mt lower, but purchasing interest in the positions is evident. The $222.50/mt CFR average of the bids and offers would suggest a $209/mt CFR value for dutiable Russian or Ukranian tonnage, inclusive of credit, for a 205/mt CFR cash equivalent or about $185-190/mt FOB from the Black Sea, depending on cargo size and discharge port.
CAN
EUROPE
Germany: Yara posts new season CAN price
Yara notified its clients May 26 that the price for CAN in Germany effective June 1 onwards has been fixed at €225/mt CIF inland ports. The posting was down by €50/mt on the previous season price posted at €275/mt CIF, and was also down by €3/mt on the €228/mt CIF price published June 10, 2014, applicable for deliveries from mid-July 2014.
Jennifer Willis-Jones, Editor- Global
Tel: +44 207 903 2196
Email: jennifer. willis-jones@crugroup.com
Lars Taarland, Writer - Global
Tel: +47 5156 4869
Email: lars.taarland@crugroup.com
BK Morris, Writer – North America
Tel: +1 240 965-7669
Email: bk.morris@crugroup.com
Deepak Chitroda, Contributor - India
Tel: +91 22 66875713
Email: deepak.chitroda@crugroup.com
Ben Farey, Editor in Chief
Direct Tel: +44 (0) 207 903 2015
Mobile: +44 (0) 7885557034
Email: ben.farey@crugroup.com
Subscriptions & Customer Services
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2146
Email: customer.services@crugroup.com
Legal Copyright Notice © 2015 CRU International Ltd
Please note: Access to and use of this product are restricted by copyright and other law to named authorised users of companies with valid licences to do so. Any other use is prohibited. The copyright of this product is held by CRU International Ltd. It is a breach of law to forward/share this product or any of its contents, including but not limited to, single prices to any person, whether in your company or otherwise, unless that person is an authorised user under a valid licence.
The commission of any unauthorised act in relation to this product may result in civil or criminal actions.
Disclaimer:
While all reasonable efforts are taken to ensure the reliability of the fertilizer pricing and freight pricing data, FW does not guarantee its accuracy or take liability for the results obtained by using the data.
Using FW prices in contracts: Many subscribers to Fertilizer Week use Fertilizer Week benchmark prices in their contracts. When both sides in a business arrangement agree in advance to use a set of prices it creates more certainty and saves everyone time – as long as the prices can be relied upon. Fertilizer Week publishes a regularly updated methodology document with detailed definitions of every price we publish. By understanding how we calculate our prices, you will be able to build your own scenarios based on these prices
For more detail on methodology view our Pricing Methodology Guide
CRU International Ltd. Registered in England No 940750.
Registered Office: Charles House, 108-110 Finchley Road, London, NW3 5JJ.
Tel: + 44 20 7903 2000 Fax: +44 20 7837 0976
www.crugroup.com
28 May | 2015
Notes: (1) While FW makes all reasonable efforts to ensure the reliability of the data, it does not guarantee its accuracy nor take liability for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from any use of the data.
ANALYSIS
Future price direction dominates IFA ammonia talks
This week’s IFA Istanbul conference failed to stimulate additional demand with most of the focus on future price direction.
Despite the fixture of the June Tampa price just one week ago, the July price level to be agreed between Yara and Mosaic is already subject to conjecture. The general consensus is that a rollover at $450/mt CFR would reflect expected limited price movements west of Suez, while others suggest a further decline of $15/mt is not out of the question.
Those few forecasting an increase in the July Tampa figure attribute their belief to continued strong US demand in an otherwise weak market. US Gulf arrivals are bolstered by Koch's line-up after it recently secured just over 100,000 mt from the Black Sea and Baltic priced at around $390/mt FOB, with most tonnes destined for its domestic supply chain. There are indications that Koch is negotiating further purchases from the Baltic, Black Sea and possibly Algeria for July lifting amid reports of production issues at its US facilities.
US phosphate producers Mosaic and PotashCorp are expected to run plants at normal rates, keeping ammonia demand for MAP and DAP production steady over the summer.
US inland demand for ammonia may have taken a slight hit in recent weeks though, as wet weather prevented ammonia applications in most of May. It remains to be seen if US suppliers can catch up in June, or if some farmers will turn to urea/UAN instead of ammonia for supplemental applications for corn acres.
East of Suez sentiment points to continued weakness on ample supply. CJ Indonesia’s tender award to Yara May 26 at $437/mt CFR evidenced little change in pricing, while Koch was able to pick up 16,000 mt from Petronas under a formula pricing arrangement to meet contract commitments in South Korea.
Output at Qafco’s ammonia units continues to run well with all product used against contract commitments. Additional ammonia needs are being met by securing product from Sabic and Ameropa over the next month.
Highlights of the week:
∙Ameropa sells 20,000 mt to Koch ex-Yuzhnny around $390/mt FOB
∙Koch picks up 15,000 mt from Ameropa ex-Sillamae at $390/mt FOB
∙Optimism that Tunisian ammonium demand will soon recover
∙OCP reports full ammonia tanks; seeking below $400/mt CFR for June
∙Muntajat to secure additional cargoes from Ameropa and Sabic
∙Koch buys 16,000 mt Petronas cargo against SFC commitments
∙Namhae seeking July/August additional cargo
Short term outlook:
Softness will prevail in the ammonia market with pricing east and west of Suez expected to move little.
Ammonia versus DAP
OCP is maintaining granulation rates in June at similar levels to May and as such ammonia demand should be relatively steady particulalry as more focus is being given to MAP. In Tunisia and Jordan however, demand will remain curtailed although following the news that rock production has been resumed at one mine, GCT is expected to give priority to DAP production at Gabes and this will prompt renewed ammonia requirements.
Caprolactam versus ammonia
Caprolactam prices were stable at last week's level of $1,750-1800/mt CFR China following several weeks of increases to their highest levels since early January.
MARKETS
AMMONIA
NORTH AMERICA
US Gulf: Imports needed to restock inland supply chain
US ammonia imports appear likely to step up in June and July, mostly through Koch, as US suppliers take in imported material to help replenish consumption from the direct application market this spring. Speculation about July pricing at Tampa already is underway, with many market watchers betting on a flat $450/mt CFR or even lower price tag. Bullish views are less common.
US Midwest: Side-dress ammonia waits for dry ground
While there are no floods underway in the US Midwest, the ground has been wet for much of the month of May, and farmers have been careful to focus on planting corn during those days suitable for field work. This has left fewer days available for finishing preplant or starting side-dress ammonia applications, according to distributors. There are anecdotal reports of higher sales of urea and UAN in recent weeks compared to seasonal norms. Price is not a factor at this stage, as ammonia remains the cheapest form of nitrogen at $605-625/st FOB.
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA
Brazil: Petrobras to market ammonia cargos in H2 2015
Petrobras indicated it will have two ammonia spot cargoes available for lifting in H2 2015. The first will likely be marketed in August with the second available towards the end of the year.
FORMER SOVIET UNION (FSU)
Baltic Sea: Koch may repeat recent Baltic purchase
Ameropa has sold a 15,000 mt parcel to Koch reportedly around $390/mt FOB. The cargo will be loaded on the Clipper Neptune early June in Sillamae and will then pick up 25,000 mt from Uralchem in Ventspils.
Uralchem is in negotiations as regards spot tonnage for July lifting, possibly with Koch again.
The supplier will have scarce tonnes to market in August and September as its ammonia facility undergoes a maintenance shutdown.
Black Sea: Koch secures more tonnes for Clipper Orion
Koch secured the remaining 20,000 mt it needed to complete a full 40,000 mt for loading on the Clipper Orion May 28. Its latest purchase from Ameropa is reported concluded within the current Black Sea range at $380-390/mt FOB.
This follows Ameropa's sale to Koch last week on the Gas Grouper for the US. Koch has chartered the vessel from Ameropa for the coming month and will likely use the vessel to shuttle between Trinidad and the US.
Ameropa is also in spot discussions with Qafco’s marketing arm Muntajat for the sale of 23,000 mt on a CFR basis, likely to be delivered to Jordan at the end of June.
OPZ is currently in negotiations for the sale of another 20,000 mt in June, possibly to Koch again.
Despite repeated rumours of a maintenance shutdown at Group DF's Russian plant scheduled for June, firm details on the timetable of such a turnaround were not disclosed at press time.
Group DF's suspension of nitrogen production at its Ukrainian facilities CherkassyAzot and RivneAzot announced May 28 are unlikely to have a material effect on ammonia. The majority of ammonia produced at the units is used to produce urea and ammonium nitrate with only small volumes available for merchant use.
Group DF's other Ukrainian nitrogen units Gorlovka and Severodonetsk in Eastern Ukraine have been shut since May 2014 due to political unrest in the region.
NF Trading has around 23,000 mt spot tonnage available for June lifting:
MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA
Qatar: Muntajat to secure additional ammonia cargoes
Qafco’s ammonia units are running well with product fully committed for June and July with contract customers.
Qafco’s marketing arm Muntajat said it also plans to secure a 23,000 mt cargo from Sabic and a similar sized parcel from Ameropa out of the Black Sea in the next month to be used against contract business, likely in Jordan and South Africa.
Jordan: Subdued ammonia demand likely in near term
Jordanian ammonia demand is likely to remain subdued in the near term as JPMC indicated it will be producing around 450,000 mt DAP this year, down from close to 650,000 mt in 2014. Increased emphasis will be given to phosphoric acid this year including shipments into Indonesia, India and Turkey.
Tunisia: Increased optimism for the fertilizer industry
There was increased optimism among market participants at the IFA Istanbul conference this week that Tunisian fertilizer production will soon get back on track.
CPG has re-started phosphate rock production at its Kef Eddour mine after a three-week total stoppage and months of strikes, sit-ins and general disruption.
Ammonia demand is not expected to increase substantially for another few weeks at least, although one 23,000 mt cargo ex-Black Sea will be arriving in Gabes early June owing to on-going AN production in Tunisia.
Morocco: Buyer seeks even lower values for June
OCP is reported targeting numbers substantially below $400/mt CFR for June ammonia deliveries.
At present the buyer reports its tanks are full following a number of recent deliveries from Yuzhnny and Algeria and is in no hurry to buy additional cargo.
INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
India: No uptick in demand expected in coming months
Indian ammonia demand is reported stable and likely to remain so over the coming months. Despite recent arrivals of phosphoric acid into the country, supplies are still relatively limited and not substantial enough to stimulate additional ammonia demand.
Deepak Fertilisers will take delivery of a 7,500 mt contract cargo of ammonia ex-Iran mid June to be priced via formula. The buyer’s next spot requirement is likely to be in mid July.
ASIA AND OCEANIA
South Korea: Namhae seeking yet more spot cargo
Namhae said is in discussions for an additional 15,000 mt parcel for July/August delivery with a number of trader offers received. Namhae’s previous spot purchase was secured at $433/mt CFR from Yara several weeks ago.
Ammonia demand remains weak with suggestions that SFC’s affiliate Tong Suh Petrochemical Corp may reduce its acrylonitrile production rates further.
Taiwan: CPDC likely to buy another Iran cargo
CPDC will target another cargo outside contract commitments for July delivery, likely from Iran. The buyer has secured two spot cargoes from Raintrade since the start of this year and is looking to increase trade further.
Contract prices continue to hover around $450/mt CFR but due to continued weak ammonia demand from downstream caprolactam and acrylonitrile buyers, downward price pressure is set to be maintained.
Malaysia: Koch buys from Petronas
Koch has bought a 16,000 mt Petronas ammonia cargo for lifting on the Bunga Kemobja under a formula pricing arrangement. The cargo will be used against Koch’s contract with SFC in Korea.
Indonesia: Yara awarded CJ tender
CJ Indonesia has awarded its May 25 6,000 mt ammonia import tender to Yara at $437/mt CFR.
Kaltim V is reported running ammonia at 75% capacity and urea at 45% after technical issues earlier this month.
Jennifer Willis-Jones, Editor- Global
Tel: +44 207 903 2196
Email: jennifer. willis-jones@crugroup.com
BK Morris, Writer – North America
Tel: +1 240 965-7669
Email: bk.morris@crugroup.com
Deepak Chitroda, Contributor - India
Tel: +91 22 66875713
Email: deepak.chitroda@crugroup.com
Ben Farey, Editor in Chief
Direct Tel: +44 (0) 207 903 2015
Mobile: +44 (0) 7885557034
Email: ben.farey@crugroup.com
Subscriptions & Customer Services
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2146
Email: customer.services@crugroup.com
Legal Copyright Notice © 2015 CRU International Ltd
Please note: Access to and use of this product are restricted by copyright and other law to named authorised users of companies with valid licences to do so. Any other use is prohibited. The copyright of this product is held by CRU International Ltd. It is a breach of law to forward/share this product or any of its contents, including but not limited to, single prices to any person, whether in your company or otherwise, unless that person is an authorised user under a valid licence.
The commission of any unauthorised act in relation to this product may result in civil or criminal actions.
Disclaimer:
While all reasonable efforts are taken to ensure the reliability of the fertilizer pricing and freight pricing data, FW does not guarantee its accuracy or take liability for the results obtained by using the data.
Using FW prices in contracts: Many subscribers to Fertilizer Week use Fertilizer Week benchmark prices in their contracts. When both sides in a business arrangement agree in advance to use a set of prices it creates more certainty and saves everyone time – as long as the prices can be relied upon. Fertilizer Week publishes a regularly updated methodology document with detailed definitions of every price we publish. By understanding how we calculate our prices, you will be able to build your own scenarios based on these prices
For more detail on methodology view our Pricing Methodology Guide
CRU International Ltd. Registered in England No 940750.
Registered Office: Charles House, 108-110 Finchley Road, London, NW3 5JJ.
Tel: + 44 20 7903 2000 Fax: +44 20 7837 0976
www.crugroup.com
28 May | 2015
Bulk DEL
Notes: (1) Freight rates are supplied by Bery Maritime: + 47 23 11 35 00 (Norway) / +86 755 2689 7049 (China) / +65 6236 2580 (Singapore) / E-mail: bery@bery.no. While Bery Maritime takes all reasonable efforts to ensure the reliability of the data, it does not guarantee its accuracy nor take liability for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from any use of the data.
ANALYSIS
Brazil more likely to firm while India looks weaker
Despite no new price movements in either Brazil or India, this week's IFA conference was a hive of activity with a surge in buying interest from Turkey, a number of significant new deals and important supply developments emerging elsewhere.
The biggest deal agreed this week has been the 1.35 million mt DAP/NPK/NPS three year contract in India between PhosAgro and IPL. This truly cements PhosAgro's return to the Indian market after a three year absence.
Having already supplied a sizeable volume of DAP and NPKs to India through March and April, further quantities will continue to be shipped through the year. This will provide PhosAgro with a useful alternative to Africa for its NPKs, where it faces increasing competition from Morocco, while also reducing its dependence on the Americas for DAP/MAP.
The Turkish market has sprung into action this week with up to 180,000 mt DAP, or almost 50% of its annual requirement, already booked. The uncertainties arising from the situation in Tunisia have prompted buyers to look at all manner of sources as well as alternative products. Tonnes from Jordan, Lithuania, Morocco and Egypt have been booked along with 18,000 mt from Tunisian stocks. In addition a substantial quantity of 20- 20-0 was also booked this week, no doubt to provide a cheaper alternative to DAP following the depreciation of the currency in recent months. Additional spot opportunities will depend on if and how quickly GCT can resume DAP production at Gabes.
This was another significant development to occur this week. On Tuesday, employees at CPG's headquarters in Tunisia returned to work while production at one of CPG's rock mines was resumed. The situation had become critical with the whole industry paralysed from the mine to the transport system, all of the downstream facilities and on up to the management level. Those markets watching developments in Tunisia most closely will be Turkey and southern Europe where GCT would normally have been targeting June/Q3 tonnes. The issues in Gafsa are so deeply entrenched, as Fertilizer Week has been reporting on a regular basis, that production rates are not expected to return to "normal" levels overnight. But it is a major step forward and marks a reversal of the critical spiral that has brought the industry to its knees over the past month.
With DAP production likely to be the priority for GCT in the near term, availability of TSP is expected to become tight. This week also saw the attacks in Syria threatening the phosphate rock mines near Palmyra. Syrian rock is used by Lebanon Chemicals for TSP production and LCC will be targeting next week's tender in Bangladesh for the private sector TSP requirement. With Chinese TSP banned and nothing coming out of Tunisia, without LCC supply sources for this tender could be limited.
The Brazilian market remains steady with no sign yet of any surge in demand sufficient to drive prices up any further. The most significant development this week was the announcement that OCP had sold 70,000 mt MAP into Brazil for June at a rollover price of $500/mt CFR. As indicated in Fertilizer Week's report pre-IFA, a certain resistance seemed to have crept into the market with the $500/mt CFR level marking a
ceiling. However suppliers have now started to indicate $510/mt CFR and with timing now becoming more
crucial in the face of potential congestion at the ports, suppliers are hoping that importers may be forced to concede an increase in price.
Chinese suppliers meanwhile remain united on price in India despite considerable downward pressure from buyers looking for a reduction of between $5-15/mt on imported DAP. Chinese producers, having already shipped 2 million mt DAP/MAP through January-April, appear, at least for the near term, to be comfortable going into June. However June, July and H1 August mark the peak export season for China, with no pull from the domestic market until mid August. As such, any further wobbles in the rupee against the USD or any new evidence that the monsoon will indeed be below normal, will almost certainly lead to a correction in the DAP price. Chinese MAP (10-50-0 and 11-44-0) prices on the other hand look firm through the next six weeks, supported by steady import demand from Brazil.
∙PhosAgro agrees 3-year deal in India for 1.35 million mt DAP/NPK/NPS
∙Turkish buyers return to the market
∙OCP sells 70,000 mt MAP for $500/mt CFR Brazil
∙Chinese DAP suppliers remain united on price in India amidst continued pressure
∙80,000 mt Moroccan MAP/DAP to load in July for the US
∙Jordanian DAP production to remain below capacity in 2015
∙Rock production resumed in Tunisia
∙ISIS threatens phosphate rock mining region in Syria
∙Increase confirmed for Jordanian rock prices
∙OCP continues to indicate early Q3 for commercial production of JPH-1 and the next three units to start up at six monthly intervals thereafter
Sulphur
Sulphur markets were stable to slightly higher this week. Tasweeq moved its QSP up $2/mt to $141/mt FOB, roughly in line with expectations but remaining conservative, as spot business from the Middle East was reported in the mid-$140s/mt FOB and the seller's recent tender went at the low-to-mid-$140s/mt FOB. With the price announced and IFA discussion out of the way, activity is expected to pick up over the coming week.
Ammonia
∙No major price movements on ammonia this week but the market remains soft both east and west of Suez.
Short Term Outlook
Brazilian farm economics and weather factors in India will determine the health of the phosphate market through Q3. Any further drop in crop prices and/or hike in interest rates will almost certainly impact farmers' buying power in Brazil. Otherwise demand should be relatively strong with some even expecting a spike in price prompted by condensed demand for imports in a comparatively small window. In India, over 4 million mt DAP have now been secured in the form of spot sales, MoUs and shipments to Mosaic's own system for the year. Further spot demand will therefore depend on weather factors.
Never before has currency volatility played such an important part in the phosphate market as it has over the past year with the weaker Indian rupee, euro and Turkish lira reducing buying power while the collapse in the Rouble has pushed Russian producers to the bottom of the cost curve. Even the weaker Brazilian real, which
although ultimately is good for the exporting farmer, has caused problems arising from the sheer volatility and subsequent uncertainty. Currency movements will continue to influence price going forward.
MARKETS
DAP/MAP
NORTH AMERICA
US NOLA: Barge market creeps higher on thin trade
DAP barges changed hands this week at $420-427/st FOB, according to suppliers. Spot MAP quotes are $5- 10/st above DAP levels. But it appears the somewhat broad price spread occurred on relatively thin trading. Phosphate demand mostly has been met along the Arkansas River, and barges are unlikely to be able to move up that waterway at any substantial rate in coming days due to flooding. In northern markets, demand for phosphates will likely require further spot barge purchases to cover the remaining demand from soybean and hay crops.
Meanwhile, OCP/Morocco said it has committed an 80,000 mt DAP/MAP cargo to load for the US Gulf during July. The material is destined for Koch and PotashCorp.
US Tampa: Export market quiet after IFA
Mosaic has not reported any export trade this week. Many of the players in the international phosphates market participated in this week's IFA meeting in Istanbul, Turkey. However, no substantial changes in US export expectations emerged.
Any new spot business, if in Brazil, could move the Tampa price up more in line with recent deals concluded by OCP. A $500/mt CFR Brazil would give a netback closer to the low-mid $480s/mt FOB Tampa, a $10/mt increase on current price indications out of the Gulf.
US Midwest: DAP demand met, some carryover stocks
DAP demand for corn and soybean acres in the Midwest has been met, with most phosphate applied for those crops, even though soybean planting progress is trailing expectations in Iowa, Kansas and Missouri, according to the May 26 US Crop Progress report. Distributors on both sides of the Mississippi River report they are ending the season with some carryover DAP and MAP, but they are not concerned that phosphate values will move substantially up or down before the fall season. Quotes for DAP remain around $460/st FOB, while MAP is available for as little as a $5/st premium.
There will be some further demand for phosphates for hay and alfalfa. Wet weather has delayed the first cuttings for those crops in many places, which in turn delays further fertilizer applications for subsequent harvesting.
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA
Argentina: Import interest should emerge for June
Importers are expected to start showing an interest in June cargoes. Price indications for MAP 11-52-0 for June shipment are between $505-515/mt CFR with Russian and Saudi tonnes within this range. Chinese 11- 52-0 remains elusive as none of the Chinese producers are producing it, still preferring to supply DAP and granular 10-5-0. Unlike Brazil, Chinese 11-44-0 is not generally sold into Argentina as it attracts a 6% duty (on NPs).
Brazil: Rollover price for OCP June MAP sales
OCP has sold 70,000 mt MAP and 30,000 mt TSP into Brazil for June shipment. The price for the MAP was unchanged from the last round of May sales at $500/mt CFR. The TSP was priced at $400/mt CFR, an increase of around $15/mt since the last reported sales out of Morocco into Brazil.
OCP has allocated a further 100,000 mt also for June shipment which is yet to be sold and for which it is targeting a price of $510/mt CFR.
PhosAgro is also targeting $510/mt CFR for MAP/DAP for June shipment.
FORMER SOVIET UNION (FSU)
Russia: PhosAgro agrees 1.35 million NPK/DAP to India
PhosAgro agreed a three-year supply deal with IPL for 1.35 million mt fertilizers, mainly NPKs 10-26-26 and 15-15-15, but also including DAP and NPS.
This suggests total shipments per year of 400-450,000 mt for India. PhosAgro has already shipped a considerable quantity to India through March/April totalling an estimated 300-340,000 mt DAP plus NPKs to IPL/IFFCO. It has not yet been confirmed whether any of these cargoes are included in the current contract.
At today's prices and freights, Indian netbacks on Russian DAP are in the low/mid $450s/mt FOB Baltic, significantly lower than potential netbacks from Brazil at current price levels of $500/mt CFR. Brazilian landed prices would give a netback above $470/mt FOB Baltic including trader margin. PhosAgro has this week raised its price indication for Brazil for June to $510/mt CFR.
The company is indiacting a sizeable domestic delivery schedule through Q3 this year, much later than normal and due to the dismal volume sold into the local market through Q1. As much as 500,000 mt MAP/NPKs are targeted for sale into the Russian market from June through September.
EUROPE
Turkey: Surge in buying activity before and during IFA
Details of a number of deals emerged at this week’s IFA conference in Istanbul totalling 150,000 mt NP 20-
20-0 and between 135-185,000 mt DAP as follows:
Toros – 50-100,000 mt DAP including some NPKs from OCP/Morocco for June-September shipment.
Igsas – 30,000 mt DAP from EuroChem/Lithuania at $505/mt CFR duty free with 180 days credit for end May shipment.
Various southern Turkish distributers – 30,000 mt DAP from Ameropa/JPMC/Jordan at $507/mt CFR Iskenderun duty free with 270 days credit for June shipment.
Gubretas – 18,000 mt DAP from GCT /Tunisia for May shipment – out of stocks and as part of eventual supply contract yet to be announced.
Gemlik – 150,000 mt 20-20-0 from China (direct sale) at $295/mt FOB, equating to an estimated $320- 325/mt CFR.
Southern buyers - 5,000 mt Egyptian DAP from Aries at around $510/mt CFR with credit for prompt shipment.
Scope for further spot DAP business will depend on how successful the Tunisian government’s current attempt is to re-start DAP production at Gabes. If GCT is able to produce in the coming weeks and supply against its expected contract, demand for spot tonnes will reduce accordingly. Given a return to production, GCT could supply in the region of 150,000 mt from June onwards but any shortfall will be picked up through imports.
Turkey is generally expected to require around 400,000 mt imported DAP per year with the eventual quantity dependent on prevailing prices and buyers’ buying power. Some quantities are also imported, mainly from Jordan, for delivery over the border into northern Iraq however a substantial rise in delivery costs since the beginning of this year due to the far greater security risks could reduce demand for this region.
In addition, the 30% depreciation of the lira over the past year or so will have an impact on eventual demand for the Turkish market and as such overall quantities are expected be down. This is one of the reasons undoubtedly supporting Gemlik’s decision to import the large quantity of 20-20-0, as a cheaper alternative to DAP.
MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA
Jordan: Limited spot availability for June onwards
Ameropa sold a 30,000 mt DAP cargo from JPMC into southern Turkey for June shipment at $507/mt CFR Iskenderun with 270 days credit giving an estimated netback of just above or at $480/mt FOB Aqaba.
JPMC will be producing 420-450,000 mt DAP this year, down from close to 650,000 mt in 2014. Increased emphasis will be given to phosphoric acid including shipments into Indonesia, India and Turkey.
Despite the drop in DAP production, JPMC will continue to supply the 300,000 mt against its contract with IPL through to March next year and will most probably direct any balance into Turkey and other Med markets. With 30,000 mt already sold into Turkey plus tonnes into Bulgaria, further availability for the rest of the year will be limited.
The Aqaba plant will return to full granulation production by the beginning of next year and by mid 2016, JPMC is aiming to reach the planned 1 million mt DAP target following prolonged debottlenecking work. Production of MAP and NPKs at the Aqaba complex is also planned.
Morocco: June MAP/DAP price unchanged on May
OCP sold 180,000 mt MAP, DAP and TSP to Brazil and Europe for June and has allocated a further 100,000 mt for the Brazilian market, also for June. The price achieved on the Brazilian MAP sales was $500/mt CFR, unchanged from the last round of tonnes sold for May shipment.
OCP has also announced an agreement to supply 50-100,000 mt DAP and some NPKs to Toros/Turkey for June-September shipment. Price details have not yet been disclosed.
OCP’s line up for June includes the following:
Brazil - 70,000 mt MAP at $500/mt CFR
Brazil -30,000 mt TSP at $400/mt CFR
Brazil -100,000 mt allocated and not yet priced – targeting $510/mt CFR
Europe - 80,000 mt DAP/MAP sold at $505-510/mt FOB comprising 20,000 mt DAP to Romania, 20,000 mt DAP/MAP for Poland, 15,000 mt DAP for Spain and 10,000 mt for France
Domestic – 30,000 mt DAP/NPK
Africa – 60,000 mt NPKs, mostly 15-15-15 for Nigeria but some 12-24-12 for Benin.
OCP is indicating $330/mt FOB for 15-15-15 sales into African markets and $350/mt FOB for sales into Europe.
The above (including a portion for Turkey) totals 385,000 mt granulated products but equates to nearer 350,000 mt DAP equivalent when calculated from a P2O5 basis.
Phosacid shipments will run at a rate of around 120,000 mt P2O5 this month comprising 90,000 mt P2O5 for India and the balance for Pakistan.
For July, OCP is to ship around 80,000 mt MAP/DAP to the US, split between PCS and Koch, priced on a formula basis. This may be loaded on one vessel or could be increased to comprise 2 x 50,000 mt lots.
OCP is also planning to ship 50-70,000 mt to China in July, under its government-to-government agreement.
Start-up for OCP's first JPH complex at Jorf Lasfar is still scheduled for end June/early July, as reported last week. Output of granulated products will remain relatively low while production at the phosphoric acid unit is ramped up through Q3.
OCP is still indicating start-up of the additional three JPH plants, each with 475,000 mt P2O5 phosphoric acid capacity plus DAP/MAP/NPKs, at six monthly intervals thereafter with the fourth scheduled for end 2016.
Tunisia: CPG resumes rock production at one mine
CPG has re-started phosphate rock production at its Kef Eddour mine after a three-week total stoppage and months of strikes, sit-ins and general disruption.
Employees of the company also resumed work earlier this week at CPG headquarters in Gafsa.
Production at the remaining rock mines, e.g. Metlaoui, Oom Larayes, M'dhilla and Redayef, is still understood to be suspended. It is still early days and a return to some normality is yet to be achieved given the scale of the crisis to beset the region this year and which has escalated over the past two months to finally bring the industry to its knees.
As reported previously, rock supplies at all the downstream units have been exhausted and as such it will be a little time before fresh deliveries of finished fertilizers or phosphoric acid are available for export. Calls for the import of phosphate rock last week to bring some relief to the downstream operations may now be retracted if attempts to resume indigenous rock production are successful.
Turkey is GCT's key market for the coming weeks and months and it will not wish to jeopardise its market share or its relationship with Gubretas by not being in a position to supply the latter's requirements. Therefore with this and the start of southern European DAP demand in just a few weeks, DAP production at Gabes is likely to be given priority in the near term. In the meantime, it will deliver 18,000 mt to Gubretas this month out of stocks as part of its supply agreement.
GCT's last confirmed shipment was a 6,000 mt DAP lot into Italy at the beginning of May. Price on this shipment has not been disclosed.
INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
Bangladesh: MoA tender closing on May 31
The Ministry of Agriculture's (MoA) will close its tender on May 31 for the private sector supply of DAP, TSP and MOP to Bangladesh.
The tender will close on May 31 for a total of 400,000 mt DAP, 200,000 mt TSP and 240,000 mt MOP, all for shipment by September. Individual companies can submit offers for a maximum of 40,000 mt DAP, 30,000 mt TSP or 24,000 mt MOP. However, there is no known quota on quantities from the same origins.
Any request for extension to the shipment period will be decided by the MoA on a case by case
basis. Letters of credit will be opened 5 days after receiving approval from the MoA. Product not meeting the inspection will result in the blacklisting of both importer and manufacturer.
The tender will attract offers of DAP from China, Australia and probably Saudi Arabia also. Availbility of TSP will be tight, particularly for prompt shipment. Lebanon Chemicals traditionally takes a good proportion of this
business but with the latest developments in Syria, LCC's production could be jeopardised in the short term. Chinese TSP is banned and Tunisian production has been suspended.
Pakistan: Further details on DAP sales emerge
Both importers rumoured to have pending DAP cargoes before IFA are understood to have finalised June cargoes.
Chawla purchased a cargo of Chinese DAP while Pakarab is believed to have booked Saudi product. Price details are sketchy at press-time but are likely to be in line with recent sales from both origins, i.e. in the low $480s/mt CFR for Chinese and upper $480s/mt for Saudi.
India: PhosAgro DAP/NPK deal with IPL over 3 years
Further details are emerging on the sale of 1.35 million mt Russian DAP/NPKs reported yesterday. The deal between PhosAagro and IPL is over a three year period between 2015 and 2018 suggesting around 400- 450,000 mt per year and will include15-15-15 and 10-26-26 as well as DAP and NPS.
This deal follows the flurry of cargoes sold for March/April shipment by PhosAgro to IPL and IFFCO earlier this year. Around nine cargoes, mainly DAP, were shipped with the DAP priced in the low-mid $480s/mt CFR. All these cargoes have now been loaded and have either arrived or are on the water, but it has not yet been confirmed whether any of the IPL cargoes are included in the current year's contract.
PhosAgro has not shipped any NPKs to India in such sizeable volumes since 2012 when it exported an estimated 250,000 mt through Ameropa against its contract with IFFCO.
India: UP tender offers in $478-489.99/mt CFR range
Uttar Pradesh has opened the price offers against its tender of May 16 for 300,000 mt DAP. Prices were in the $478-489.99/mt CFR range.
Kerala Sidco offered the lowest.
Against its tender of May 18 for 20,000 mt granular 11-44-0 or DAP lite, RCF has awarded the business to Fertisul, who offered GMAP 11-44-0 at $410.50/mt CFR.
ASIA AND OCEANIA
China: Producers still take united stance on price
Producers remain united on price in India, with the larger producers sticking to the $480/mt CFR India level while slightly lower can be achieved from the mid-tier and smaller producers. As such the range published in Fertilizer Week remains unchanged from last week.
Pressure remains on suppliers to lower prices in India by as much as $10/mt while one producer at least is looking for a reduction to $465/mt CFR. This would give a netback to the low $450s/mt FOB or lower, depending on freight.
Suppliers are comfortable for the short term and aside from India, are expecting solid demand to start in Pakistan along with the imminent tender in Bangladesh for 400,000 mt DAP.
Chinese 10-50-0 and 11-44-0 price levels are firm in the mid-to-high $420s/mt FOB and the mid $390s/mt FOB respectively. With Brazil expected to show strong demand through June and into July for Chinese granular products, price levels will remain firm and availability tight.
China: Jan-April DAP/MAP exports hit 2 million mt
The latest GTIS data for January-April show DAP/MAP exports at 2 million mt already. This is a considerable volume and above most expectations for the time of year. This total comprised 1.4 million mt DAP and 605,000 mt MAP. Comparable quantities for 2013 and 2014 were just 1.1 million mt and 275,000 mt DAP/MAP respectively.
Looking at April itself, China exported 481,000 mt DAP including 173,000 mt for India and a further 75,000 mt for Vietnam and 55,000 mt for Thailand.
April MAP exports reached 124,000 mt including 57,000 mt for Brazil.
Chinese NP exports (including 11-44-0) for April reached 58,000 mt including cargoes for India, Kenya and the Philippines. This brought the total for the year to date to just over 300,000 mt, again well above previous years.
Exports of SSP/TSP through January-April were slightly down on last year and while exports of SSP were slightly higher, it was TSP shipments that fell year on year. China exported 198,000 mt TSP in the first four months, down from 270,000 mt over the same period in 2014. A lack of any shipments to Iran to date in 2015 has been the sole reason for the drop in export volumes this year as quantities to other markets remained buoyant.
PHOSPHATE ROCK
MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA
Syria: Islamic State attack threatens Syrian rock
This week's attack on Palmyra and the surrounding region by the so-called Islamic State (IS) threatens the production of Syrian phosphate rock at Knaifess.
Despite the troubles, Syria has managed to export regular quantities of rock since 2011, albeit in much- reduced quantities. In Q1 this year, it exported 44,000 mt rock to Greece, according to GTIS, along with additional quantities to the Ukraine, Bulgaria and Italy.
Lebanon Chemical's TSP production traditionally depends on Syrian rock and as a result of this latest development, TSP availability from LCC will almost certainly be affected unless an alternative rock source is found.
Jordan: Q2 phosphate rock prices confirmed
Phosphate rock prices for Q2 have been confirmed with an increase on Q1 as follows: 68-70% BPL at $120/mt FOB for shipments to India and $122-124/mt FOB for other destnations; 73-75% BPL at $130- 134/mt fob for India and $132-136/mt FOB for non-Indian markets. The price assessment for 66-70% BPL this week only reflects the changed price for 68-70% BPL as details on the lower grade are not yet available.
NP/NPKS
ASIA AND OCEANIA
Southeast Asia: NPK prices increase on good demand
Vietnam imported 57,188 mt of NPKs in April bringing its January-April NPK imports to more than 100,000 mt with Q1 NPK production seen at over 560,000 mt.
May continued to see shipments into Vietnam and current prices are around $405-410/mt CFR.
The Thailand and Myanmar markets are seeing even higher prices currently, putting the range at $410- 420/mt CFR. As a result Southeast Asian NPK prices have increased by $5-10/mt and are in the $405- 420/mt CFR range.
China: NPK imports up with jump in Russian deliveries
China imported 413,000 mt NPKs between January and April, a 64% increase on the previous year but lower than the same period in 2013, according to GTIS data.
During the period, China imported 140,000 mt from Russian producers, more than a three-fold increase year on year after low levels of NPK deliveries during 2014, while Yara also delivered 140,000 mt of NPKs.
It was expected that higher domestic NPK production in China would continue to push down imports in 2015 after an 18% fall in imports during 2014 but with some small Chinese NPK plants down in H1 due to environmental concerns and demand remaining strong, international suppliers have increased deliveries.
April saw an increase in NPK volumes to China with 140,000 mt of imports; the highest April levels since 2007, with Russian producers providing 40% of the volume.
Sarah Marlow, Editor - Global
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2277
Email: sarah.marlow@crugroup.com
BK Morris , Writer – North America
Tel: +1 240 965 7669
Email: bk.morris@crugroup.com
Isaac Zhao, Contributor - China
Tel: Tel: +86 10 6510 2206
Email: isaac.zhao@crugroup.com
Deepak Chitroda, Contributor- India
Tel: +91 22 66875713
Email: deepak.chitroda@crugroup.com
Ben Farey , Editor in Chief
Direct Tel: +44 (0) 207 903 2015
Mobile: +44 (0) 7885557034
Email: ben.farey@crugroup.com
Subscriptions & Customer Services
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2146
Email: customer.services@crugroup.com
Legal Copyright Notice © 2015 CRU International Ltd
Please note: Access to and use of this product are restricted by copyright and other law to named authorised users of companies with valid licences to do so. Any other use is prohibited. The copyright of this product is held by CRU International Ltd. It is a breach of law to forward/share this product or any of its contents, including but not limited to, single prices to any person, whether in your company or otherwise, unless that person is an authorised user under a valid licence.
The commission of any unauthorised act in relation to this product may result in civil or criminal actions.
Disclaimer:
While all reasonable efforts are taken to ensure the reliability of the fertilizer pricing and freight pricing data, FW does not guarantee its accuracy or take liability for the results obtained by using the data.
Using FW prices in contracts: Many subscribers to Fertilizer Week use Fertilizer Week benchmark prices in their contracts. When both sides in a business arrangement agree in advance to use a set of prices it creates more certainty and saves everyone time – as long as the prices can be relied upon. Fertilizer Week publishes a regularly updated methodology document with detailed definitions of every price we publish. By understanding how we calculate our prices, you will be able to build your own scenarios based on these prices
For more detail on methodology view our Pricing Methodology Guide
CRU International Ltd. Registered in England No 940750.
Registered Office: Charles House, 108-110 Finchley Road, London, NW3 5JJ.
Tel: + 44 20 7903 2000 Fax: +44 20 7837 0976
www.crugroup.com
28 May | 2015
Notes: (1) Freight rates are supplied by Bery Maritime: + 47 23 11 35 00 (Norway) / +86 755 2689 7049 (China) / +65 6236 2580 (Singapore) / E-mail: bery@bery.no. While Bery Maritime takes all reasonable efforts to ensure the reliability of the data, it does not guarantee its accuracy nor take liability for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from any use of the data.
ANALYSIS
Brazilian price plans develop and BPC agrees Indian potash volumes
At the IFA Istanbul conference this week, potash suppliers developed their price targets for Brazil in the hopes of recovering weak prices so far in 2015 and BPC signed an increase in volumes to India, likely confirming an increase in Indian demand during the fertilizer year.
The Belarusian producer confirmed that it agreed Indian volumes for the current fertilizer year ended March 2016 with both regular BPC buyer IPL and three others. Although exact quantities have not been released, the deal is believed to be for more than 700,000 mt at the new contract price of $332/mt CFR with 180 days credit.
The agreement brings total contracted Indian potash volumes so far to 3.5-3.7 million mt, including some optional tonnage, compared to a total of 3.9 million mt last year. ICL and K+S is still to agree volumes (roughly 700,000 mt and 200,000 mt last year respectively), but ICL is unlikely to sign a deal to India unless ongoing strikes at its Dead Sea Works operations can be brought to an end.
PhosAgro also signed a three-year NPK supply deal to IPL during IFA for 1.35 million mt after a nearly two-year absence. The deal may lead to a slowdown in the domestic NPK production increases which have recently helped boost Indian demand for potash but with most potash contracts already signed to India, overall Indian potash imports are expected to increase to 4.4-4.8 million mt in the current fertilizer year from 4.2 million mt last year.
The increase in Indian demand runs parallel to a recent volume increase in Chinese contracts (6.1 million mt) and Chinese imports data, which shows an 18% increase in potash deliveries between January and April to 2.4 million mt. While demand is expected to fall in some global markets like Brazil during 2015, it is unlikely that deliveries will fall as far as some are expecting, still total demand should be in the range of 58-60.4 million mt in 2015.
Prices in the global spot markets have been significantly weaker than suppliers had targeted so far in 2015. This week, US prices have continued their downward trend with key planting largely completed in the Midwest and demand dropping across the buying regions. Prices in the US south have fallen to as low as $380/st FOB while NOLA barge prices cannot be seen higher than $325/st FOB.
In Southeast Asia, prices are largely the same but Malaysian sMOP quotes have lowered to $310-315/mt CFR with current larger tenders unlikely to push up prices in the near term. The price range across the region is seen at $310- 350/mt CFR with the upper end of deals only seen in the smaller markets like The Philippines, Vietnam and Thailand.
In Europe prices are also flat with potash buying out of season. Granular potash is quoted at €305-315/mt CIF with most quotes at €310/mt CIF, while standard quotes are seen at the very weak level of €270-280/mt CIF.
Most suppliers at IFA were highlighting the Brazilian market as their opportunity to boost spot prices in 2015 after the lacklustre start to 2015. The major suppliers have set their June and July delivery prices at $340-345/mt CFR and hope that they can further increase prices through until October. If some of these gains can be achieved in Brazil over the coming months it will likely have a knock on effect in the other spot markets by the end of the year but spot prices are unlikely to reach the levels they ended 2014.
Highlights of the Week:
∙BPC signs Indian quantities above 700,000 mt with IPL and 3 others
∙Total Indian volumes now seen at 3.5-3.7 million mt
∙BPC wins RCF tender for up to 265,000 mt MOP
∙Suppliers target $340-345/mt in Brazil for June/July deliveries
∙US prices fall further, US NOLA $325/st FOB and US South $380/st FOB
∙Southeast Asian potash prices dip slightly, $310-350/mt CFR vs $315-350/mt CFR
∙PhosAgro signs three-year Indian NPK supply deal for 1,35 million mt
∙Europe out of season, prices flat at €305-315/mt CIF
∙Chinese domestic prices flat at RMB2,030-2,130/mt FCA
∙Canpotex agrees to supply up to $60 m worth of potash to Bangladesh
∙China MOP imports up 18% Jan-Apr to 2.4 million mt
∙BPC postpones maintenance plans for RU-2 and RU-3
∙Europe SOP prices increase, €460-500/mt FCA vs €450-470/mt FCA
Corn, Soybean, Wheat and Rice vs Potash Pricing - Affordability Index
Explanation: the Affordability Index series compares an index of crop prices, weighted based on volumes traded through major price points for the four main agricultural commodities (wheat, corn, rice and soybeans), with a similar trade-weighted index of potash prices. When the fertilizer index falls relative to the crop index, this means that nutrients are increasingly affordable to farmers, as a share of the return they will receive for their production. As the spread narrows or even inverts, this suggests that fertilizers become less affordable on farm.
MARKETS
MOP
NORTH AMERICA
US S Plains: Truck values flat despite resupply problem
Granular potash truck values have not gained, despite the lack of resupply available from the barge market due to regional flooding. Quotes for potash from terminals along the Arkansas River remain around $380/st FOB, but distributors report retailers already have sufficient tons in hand to meet their remaining seasonal commitments.
US NOLA: Little demand remains for potash
Modest demand remains for granular potash, and it appears further price cuts from the current price tag of $325/st FOB New Orleans will do little if anything to boost demand at this stage of the season.
US buyers expect BPC will participate in the import market over the summer, perhaps shipping as much as 200,000 mt to the US. However, no deals are believed settled with potential importers at press time.
US Midwest: Potash needs met for season
Granular potash demand from retailers is down substantially, as corn and soybean planting is largely completed across the region.
Farmers generally are concerned with secondary nitrogen applications at this stage, and there is little enthusiasm for potential fill offers from Canadian producers in coming weeks.
Distributors suggest a discount of $20/st from recent retail values in the $380s/st FOB Midwest would might be needed to drive summer fill sales. However, with only moderate amounts of offshore potash likely to arrive over the summer, domestic producers may not have to give that much ground.
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA
Brazil: Suppliers target $340-345/mt CFR in Brazil
Brazil is now seen as the key region for increasing potash spot prices after a weak H1, with US and European markets largely out of season and the Southeast Asian market likely to see little change from their current weak levels until autumn.
Prices are currently seen at $330-340/mt CFR with unconfirmed deals as low as $325/mt CFR still reported. BPC and SQM are currently looking for $340/mt CFR for June/July deliveries and Uralkali have priced July deliveries at $345/mt CFR. Canpotex is believed to also be pricing in the $340-345/mt CFR range for June/July deliveries.
With Q1 Brazilian potash imports very low, buyers are expected to pick up high levels of volumes in the next few months in order to limit delays at port during September and October.
Suppliers plan to take a staged approach to price increases and if $340-345/mt levels can be maintained for July deliveries then suppliers will likely try to push for $350-370/mt levels before the end of the Brazilian season. However, the $380/mt CFR price achieved by October 2014 is unlikely to be reached before the end of 2015.
FORMER SOVIET UNION (FSU)
Belarus: Belaruskali postpones maintenance plans
Belaruskali postponed planned maintenance at RU-2 at the end of May and at RU-3 at the start of June.
The company made the decision to continue its current high rate of shipments to China and the forthcoming deliveries to India under the new contract.
It is unclear when the sites will go down for maintenance, if at all in 2015.
EUROPE
Europe: Action slows and prices unchanged
The European potash market has entered its end of season lull with gMOP prices stable at €305-315/mt CIF ($332-344).
Most suppliers quote prices around €310/mt CIF after K+S increased its prices to €315/mt CIF earlier in May but note that deals are currently limited.
Standard potash prices in Europe are seen at the exceptionally weak level of around €270-280/mt CIF ($294-305) pushing suppliers to focus standard deliveries on other markets. However, some sources indicate possible tightness in standard supply during 2015 with large supplies going to India and China while BPC is said to be producing at as high as 70-80% granular product.
Tight supply may help the standard European market see some recovery in the coming months.
INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
India: BPC agrees Indian potash volumes
Belarusian potash exporter BPC has signed its Indian quantity agreements for the current fertilizer year ending March 2016 with both regular BPC buyer IPL and three others but the exact quantity has yet to be announced.
It is believed that the company has agreed to an increase in volumes above the 700,000 mt sent by BPC to India in the previous fertilizer year.
The deal further backs up expectations of an increase in Indian demand during the current fertilizer year despite the $10/mt increase in the current contract price to $332/mt with 180 days credit.
The agreement brings total potash volumes, including some of the optional tonnage, to around 3.5-3.7 million mt. With further optional tonnage also likely to be sent to India, spot deals and tenders through the year, and both ICL and K+S still to sign volumes (700,000 mt and 200,000 mt last year respectively), Indian potash imports during the 2015 fertilizer year are likely to fall within the 4.4-4.8 million mt range compared to 2014’s 4.2 million mt.
According to Indian vessel data, around 50,000 mt has been booked for arrival in the first two weeks of June and May deliveries totalled only around 200,000 mt as suppliers agreed contracts for the new fertilizer year.
Bangladesh: Canpotex agrees BADC deal
Canpotex is to supply as much as $60 million of potash to Bangladesh in the current fertilizer year.
The deal was signed between the Canadian Commercial Corp on behalf of Canpotex and the Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation (BADC) and includes $40 million worth of potash and an additional $20 million in optional volumes.
The exact volumes have not been announced but are likely to be similar to the 120,000 mt signed during 2014 for $40 million between Canpotex and BADC, which also included an option worth $20 million for an additional 60,000 mt.
India: BPC awarded RCF MOP tender
BPC has been awarded RCF's tender for 145,000 mt firm and 120,000 mt optional MOP, closed on May 7.
The Belarusian producer was awarded the tender at the new Indian contract price of $332/mt CFR with 180 days credit.
MMTC, IPL and Transmart DMCC also made offers at $332/mt CFR with 180 days.
Delivery is split into three shipments to India in June for the firm volumes and two shipments in August for the optional tonnes.
The MMTC tender for 145,000 mt, which was expected as cover to offer in the RCF tender, is believed likely to be scrapped.
Price offers on the NFL tender for 50,000 mt which closed on May 10 have yet to be announced but should be released in the next few days.
ASIA AND OCEANIA
Vietnam: MOP imports at high level in 2015
Vietnam imported 106,505 mt of potash in April, a 24% increase year on year, according to port data, with high levels of imports believed to be continuing through May.
NPK production was seen at over 560,000 mt in Q1 2015 and the January-April MOP imports total 365,000, up 23% on 2014. Currently Vietnamese potash prices are quoted at $330-340/mt CFR.
China: Domestic prices flat amid high imports
With the end of spring application season, domestic potash purchasing activity in China has become slow and thin. Most distributors and downstream users adopt hand-to-mouth buying strategies.
Prices on the whole remain stable. Despite wholesale prices still ranging from RMB 2,000- 2,130/mt FCA ($323-344/mt) at port, the mainstream prices of 62% K2O white MOP slid again and dealt at RMB 2,100/mt FCA ($339/mt) this week, while the high end still stands at RMB 2,130/mt with small quantities.
As Fertilizer Week estimated, the April imports reached 822,612 tonnes, up by 9.1% on the 747,774 tonnes imported in April 2014. The January-April imports totalled 2.81 million tonnes, up by 18.1% on the 2.38 million tonnes imported during the same period in 2014.
BPC is currently the biggest supplier to China, accounting for nearly 30% of total January-April imports. In addition, shipments from Laos seem more consistent since Oct 2014. China imported
65,827 tonnes of MOP from Laos in January-April 2015, making the country the 7th largest exporter to China, exceeding Chile and Uzbekistan.
Southeast Asia: Suppliers struggling to push up prices
Malaysian potash prices have slipped to as low as $310-315/mt CFR with the current larger tenders unlikely to achieve higher prices in the near term and significant price increases later in the year largely reliant on a price push in Brazil.
Currency depreciation, weak agricultural commodity prices and high competition in the country have forced the Malaysian price below even the new Chinese contract level but suppliers hope they can achieve at least $330/mt CFR levels between September and December when the market builds again.
Indonesia is also priced below the $330/mt CFR level with some suppliers quoting deals as low as $315/mt CFR.
Vietnam and Thailand prices are seen at $330-345/mt CFR. High levels of imports are being seen into both countries including recent shipments from Uralkali and BPC.
Small deals to the Philippines continue to be quoted as high as $350/mt CFR for Canpotex volumes. The total range in Southeast Asia is now seen at $310-350/mt CFR.
SOP
EUROPE
Europe: SOP prices increase further in tight market
The European SOP market remains tight and prices have increased to the high level of €460-500/mt FCA from €450-470/mt FCA with contract deals at the low end and limited spot business by K+S and Chinese suppliers made at the top end. There are some unconfirmed deals as high as €520/mt FCA.
After a bumper year in 2014 regarding SOP production in China, some Chinese volumes are managing to make it into the European market for spot deals but not enough has arrived to have any effect on the under supply situation.
Between January and April, China exported 43,275 mt SOP, around 70% of its entire 2015 exports and more than five times than the same period in 2014. Just under half of the exports went straight to the European market.
Tessenderlo is still on track to increase production at the end of 2015 once it has converted its plant at Ham, Belgium, to a stand-alone SOP unit while other suppliers are likely to bring higher levels of SOP into the market by next year.
K+S may also choose to increase SOP production in Europe towards the end of 2016, replacing some European MOP production with SOP when its major Legacy potash mine in Saskatchewan begins production.
NPKS
MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA
Morocco: OCP announces Toros deal, African deliveries
OCP has also announced an agreement to supply 50-100,000 mt DAP and some NPKs to Toros/Turkey for June-September shipment. Price details have not yet been disclosed.
OCP is planning to send 60,000 mt NPKs to Africa in June, mostly 15-15-15 for Nigeria but some 12-24-12 for Benin.
The Moroccan producer is indicating $330/mt FOB for 15-15-15 sales into African markets and $350/mt FOB for sales into Europe. Other NPK suppliers to Europe say that deals are very hard to come by with the market now out of season and prices continue to be quoted at $325-335/mt FOB Baltic.
INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
India: PhosAgro agrees three-year Indian NPK deal
PhosAgro agreed a three-year deal to sell 1.35 million mt of Russian NPKs to India during the IFA conference this week.
The deal between PhosAgro and IPL suggests around 400-450,000 mt per year and will be mainly 15-15-15 and 10-26-26 but is believed to also include DAP.
This deal follows the flurry of shipments (mainly DAP cargoes) sold for March/April shipment by PhosAgro to IPL and IFFCO earlier this year.
PhosAgro has not shipped any NPKs to India in such sizeable volumes since 2012 when it exported an estimated 250,000 mt through Ameropa against its contract with IFFCO.
ASIA AND OCEANIA
China: NPK imports increase with jump in Russian deliveries
China imported 413,428 mt of NPKs between January and April, a 64% increase on the previous year but lower than the same period in 2013, according to GTIS data.
During the period, China imported 140,000 mt from Russian producers, more than a three-fold increase year on year, after low levels of NPK deliveries during 2014, while Yara also delivered 140,000 mt NPKs.
It was expected that higher domestic NPK production in China would continue to push down imports in 2015 after an 18% fall in imports during 2014 but with some small Chinese NPK plants down in H1 due to environmental concerns and demand remaining strong, international suppliers have increased deliveries.
April saw an increase in NPK volumes to China with140,000 mt imported; the highest April levels since 2007, with Russian producers providing 40% of the April deliveries.
Southeast Asia: NPK prices increase on solid demand
Vietnam imported 57,188 mt NPKs in April bringing its January-April NPK imports to more than 100,000 mt with Q1 NPK production exceeding 560,000 mt.
May has continued to see shipments into Vietnam and current prices are around $405-410/mt CFR.
The Thailand and Myanmar markets are achieving even higher prices, putting the range at $410-420/mt CFR. As a result Southeast Asian NPK prices have increased by $5-10/mt and are seen in the $405-420/mt CFR range.
NEWS
MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS
Uralkali investors tender 11.89% of shares
Uralkali said investors tendered for 11.89% of shares in its recently-announced share buyback, less than it had looked for when the plan was announced.
The deal sees Uralkali buy $1.12 billion in stock rather than the $1.5 billion it had planned.
Uralkali may now have enough offers to buy shares in order to delist from the London Stock Exchange. With some shareholders believed to see the company as undervalued, Uralkali may now look to take the company private.
Uralkali offered $3.20/share and $16/GDR for as much as a 15.97% stake in the company.
The company said the plan, which will be funded by its existing cash-flow, was intended to help distribute cash to security-holders at a time when giving out dividends would not comply with company policy. It recommended waiving a dividend based on its full-year 2014 numbers. Major owners in Uralkali, Mikhail Prokhorov's Onexim Group and Uralchem, both voted against the payment of an interim dividend in December 2014.
Uralkali, which had a cash balance of $2.5 billion at the end of 2014, eventually plans to cancel the acquired shares.
In March, Uralkali announced a new strategy for 2015-2020 in the wake of flooding at its 2.3 million mt/year Solikamsk-2 mine. The $4.5 billion investment plan to raise capacity by 30% over the next five years includes construction of a new mine at SK-2.
Uralkali also recently agreed on a $530 million loan deal with a range of international lenders, Russian business' first international loan of 2015.
Earlier in May, major shareholder UralChem announced that it would not take part in the share buyback, considering the investment as 'strategic', leaving more opportunity for minority shareholders, including Acron, to get a better return.
Tom McIvor, Editor - Global
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2142
Email: tom.mcivor@crugroup.com
Gavin Ju, Writer - Global
Tel: +86 10 6510 2206
Email: gavin.ju@crugroup.com
BK Morris, Writer - Global
Tel: +001 240 965 7669
Email: bk.morris@crugroup.com
Ben Farey, Editor in Chief
Direct Tel: +44 (0) 207 903 2015
Mobile: +44 (0) 7885557034
Email: ben.farey@crugroup.com
Subscriptions & Customer Services
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2146
Email: customer.services@crugroup.com
Legal Copyright Notice © 2015 CRU International Ltd
Please note: Access to and use of this product are restricted by copyright and other law to named authorised users of companies with valid licences to do so. Any other use is prohibited. The copyright of this product is held by CRU International Ltd. It is a breach of law to forward/share this product or any of its contents, including but not limited to, single prices to any person, whether in your company or otherwise, unless that person is an authorised user under a valid licence.
The commission of any unauthorised act in relation to this product may result in civil or criminal actions.
Disclaimer:
While all reasonable efforts are taken to ensure the reliability of the fertilizer pricing and freight pricing data, FW does not guarantee its accuracy or take liability for the results obtained by using the data.
Using FW prices in contracts: Many subscribers to Fertilizer Week use Fertilizer Week benchmark prices in their contracts. When both sides in a business arrangement agree in advance to use a set of prices it creates more certainty and saves everyone time – as long as the prices can be relied upon. Fertilizer Week publishes a regularly updated methodology document with detailed definitions of every price we publish. By understanding how we calculate our prices, you will be able to build your own scenarios based on these prices
For more detail on methodology view our Pricing Methodology Guide
CRU International Ltd. Registered in England No 940750.
Registered Office: Charles House, 108-110 Finchley Road, London, NW3 5JJ.
Tel: + 44 20 7903 2000 Fax: +44 20 7837 0976
www.crugroup.com
Fax: +44 20 7837 0976
www.crugroup.com
28 May | 2015
Notes: (1) Mediterranean (excl. domestic contracts) Spot covers volumes less than 10K mt; Mediterranean (incl. North Africa) Spot covers quantities over 10K mt; NW Europe H2 2014 - truckload Contract and Benelux H2 2014 - barge/railcar Contract reflect latest quarterly contracts. (2) Indicative Price (3) No Market
WEEKLY FREIGHTS
SULPHUR1
Notes: (1) Freight rates are supplied by Bery Maritime: + 47 23 11 35 00 (Norway) / +86 755 2689 7049 (China) / +65 6236 2580 (Singapore) / E-mail: bery@bery.no. While Bery Maritime takes all reasonable efforts to ensure the reliability of the data, it does not guarantee its accuracy nor take liability for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from any use of the data.
ANALYSIS
Further clarity on price direction emerges
Sulphur markets received further clarity on price levels this week, as Tasweeq issued it QSP for June and some market players completed discussions during the IFA conference over the market outlook.
Tasweeq’s June price of $141/mt FOB was roughly in line with expectations, though some saw it as fairly conservative, as Aramco’s June price announced earlier this month is $142/mt FOB and spot business from the Middle East has been reported as high as $148/mt FOB.
Middle Eastern sellers appear to have relatively little spot availability given strong contractual offtake, but there has been limited spot demand in recent weeks, and Chinese CFR prices are not supportive of higher FOBs, although some believe there is potential for slight increases there.
Further small increases in domestic Chinese prices were reported, but buyers were mostly resisting import spot offers. However, with phosphate production rates expected to remain steady and domestic prices already roughly equivalent to import offers, import purchases are expected to increase.
China’s April imports were up 24% on the year at 1.05 million mt, split between around 70 importers.
Indian prices remained pegged in the $160-170/mt CFR range, while Brazilian prices remained pegged within the $150-160/mt CFR range.
Reliance’s sales tender was reported awarded to Sumstar in the low $140s/mt FOB.
The Vancouver FOB spot price assessment also remained unchanged at $125-135/mt FOB, though business at the lower end of the range would likely be difficult to come by at this stage.
Elsewhere, JPMC issued its latest tender for 50,000 mt.
Highlights of the week:
∙Tasweeq posts June QSP at $141/mt FOB, up $2/mt
∙Middle East spot reported in mid-$140s/mt FOB
∙Reliance tender awarded in low $140s/mt FOB
∙Chinese April imports up 24% on year
∙Further small increases in domestic Chinese prices
∙JPMC issues latest 50,000 mt tender
MARKETS
SULPHUR
NORTH AMERICA
Canada: FOB spot business mostly in $130s/mt
Spot prices for Canadian seaborne exports remain pegged at $125-135/mt FOB Vancouver, though it is likely that the lower end of this range may now be more difficult to obtain.
A few buyers have reported recent purchases below $130/mt FOB, but most current price ideas are in the $130-135/mt FOB range.
Vancouver FOB price decreases lagged price falls elsewhere, and were still around $170/mt FOB when Middle Eastern prices had already declined to the low $150s/mt FOB in early April. They therefore subsequently underwent a steeper, more rapid decline.
One buyer said it had bought an extra parcel because of current low prices.
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA
Brazil: Sulphur spot prices stable
Brazilian prices have remained stable in recent weeks, with sources quoting prices in from $150/mt to $165/mt CFR and the spot assessment still $150-160/mt CFR.
As this is roughly in line with contract prices, buyers do not feel a great incentive to buy.
Meanwhile, Anglo American is expected to return to the market with its next purchase tender around mid June.
EUROPE
Mediterranean: Prices mostly stable
Spot prices for sulphur cargoes of 10,000 mt and less in the Mediterranean region were mostly stable, though there were some indications of higher levels in Turkey.
An Italian buyer reported offer levels of $130-135/mt CFR, while a seller reported bids from Greece and Turkey around $125-130/mt CFR.
Some players suggested that availability had improved after Lukoil’s Isab refinery in Priolo, Italy, completed its recent maintenance in late April. Meanwhile, Hellenic Petroleum’s refinery in Aspropyrgos, Greece, is currently in a turnaround that started April 20 and is set to be complete at the end of May.
Another trader quoted price levels of $140-145/mt CFR in Turkey and $135-140/mt CFR in Egypt, and argued that availability in the Med was in fact quite limited and was expected to remain so until late June.
MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA
Middle East: Spot sales reported higher
Spot prices for Middle Eastern exports have been stronger recently, with some sales from Adnoc and Aramco reported as high as $145-148/mt FOB.
Some traders see a lack of spot cargo availability from Middle Eastern sellers, despite overall spot business being fairly quiet in recent months. Sellers are understood to have had strong contractual offtake, with some saying they are fully booked at least through June.
One seller source saw the market as balanced to slightly bearish, although the odd spot enquiry was evident from some sources.
Tunisia: Some phosphate rock restarts
CPG has re-started phosphate rock production at its Kef Eddour mine after a three-week total stoppage and months of strikes, sit-ins and general disruption.
Employees of the company also resumed work earlier this week at CPG headquarters in Gafsa.
Production at the remaining rock mines is still understood to be suspended and a return to some normality is yet to be achieved given the scale of the crisis that beset the region this year.
Sulphur market participants viewed it as a "wait-and-see" situation in terms of possible effects on sulphur demand, which has been volatile from the region for some time.
For more details, see the phosphates section.
Jordan: JPMC issues 50,000 mt tender
JPMC has issued a tender for 50,000 mt sulphur for July 15-20 arrival. The tender closes June 2.
The buyer's last tender for 50,000 mt, which closed on May 7, was awarded at around $155/mt CFR.
As reported in the phosphates section, JPMC will be producing around 450,000 mt DAP this year, down from close to 650,000 mt in 2014. Increased emphasis will be given to phosphoric acid this year including shipments into Indonesia, India and Turkey.
Qatar: Tasweeq posts $141/mt FOB for June
Tasweeq announced its Qatar Sulphur Price (QSP) for June 2015 at $141/mt FOB Ras Laffan, up $2/mt from its May level.
Earlier this month, Aramco Trading posted its June price at $142/mt FOB Jubail, up $2/mt from its May price.
The announcement follows Tasweeq's most recent sales tender for 35,000 mt, which closed last week and was reportedly awarded in the low-to-mid-$140s/mt FOB.
The new QSP equates to delivered prices in China in the high $150s/mt CFR, at the upper end of the range currently deemed achievable.
INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
India: Reliance tender goes in low $140s/mt FOB
Reliance’s latest sales tender for 25,000 mt granular sulphur, which closed on May 25, was reportedly awarded to Sumstar at just above $142/mt FOB. The tender has a laycan of June 15-19.
Price ideas were initially around $145-146/mt FOB, but this seems to have been overly bullish.
India: Prices stable; RCF to decide tender
Sulphur prices in India remained unchanged at $160-170/mt CFR, though no recent business has been reported at the upper end of this range.
Offers on RCF’s 10,000 mt tender that closed May 15 were INR 9,093/mt EXW from Reliance, INR 10,515/mt EXW from Essar, INR 8,485/mt EXW from MRPL, and $170/mt CFR from Swiss Singapore. The buyer is expected to decide on an award by June 1.
An East Asian trader reported a bid from a buyer at $165/mt CFR.
Elsewhere, IFFCO had a cargo of 27,000 mt arriving on the Imperial Eagle May 27 at a price around $160/mt CFR.
ASIA AND OCEANIA
China: Price stability persists as activity limited
Chinese sulphur prices were again mostly stable week on week, with some minor domestic increases.
Port inventories showed a very slight recovery to around 950,000 mt, seemingly due to the arrival of a vessel with around 45,000 mt of crushed lump product from Saudi Arabia.
Offer prices for imported granular sulphur remained pegged at $155-160/mt CFR, but with limited business. Crushed lump was in the $140s/mt CFR, though Russian product was said to be available in the low $130s/mt CFR. Molten prices were reported from the low $140s/mt to mid-$150s/mt CFR, although there was talk of distressed Korean cargoes in the low $130s/mt FOB.
Most activity was limited to term contracts, with buyers generally resisting offer prices.
Granular prices at port were RMB 1,160-1,180/mt FCA, with some quotes at Fangcheng up to RMB 1,200/mt, although no trades were reported at this quoted level. Crushed lump prices were RMB 1,070- 1,080/mt FCA.
At the Jiangsu commodity exchange, sulphur futures for June were around RMB 1,150/mt, though trading volumes are thin.
The lack of price movements has reportedly led many traders to shift away from sulphur and into equities.
Sinopec’s Puguang again increased prices May 24, bringing its ex-factory price up to RMB 1,170/mt EXW. This is now the same level as its price at Wenzhou port, which is RMB 1,170/mt FCA.
As the producer’s prices are now similar to port prices, traders do not feel threatened by its supply. The producer has successfully reduced its stocks at plant to around a third of its storage capacity, and they are now around 30,000 mt of granular sulphur and 20,000 mt of molten. Puguang’s April production was 183,000 mt, roughly in line with 2014 levels and above recent months.
Most domestic refineries have cut production, with some maintenances from April to early June.
China: April sulphur imports jump 24%
China’s April imports of sulphur were up 23.8% year on year at 1.05 million mt, somewhat offsetting the low volume of the previous month and leaving total imports for the first four months of the year down 2.3% at 3.61 million mt.
Kazakhstan supplied 204,238 mt of the April volumes, demonstrating that it is still a key source of Chinese sulphur. This marks the highest monthly volume to Japan from Kazakhstan since February 2013.
Other key sources were Saudi Arabia (163,678 mt), Iran (120,377 mt), South Korea (107,777 mt), and the UAE (88,268 mt).
India and Turkmenistan both supplied more than usual, at 84,579 mt and 77,070 mt respectively.
Japan was the source of 76,556 mt and Canada supplied 64,937 mt after not sending any tonnes for February or March.
The volumes were split between around 70 importers.
Brendan Daly, Editor - Global
Tel: + 44 (0) 20 7903 2185
Email: brendan.daly@crugroup.com
Isaac Zhao, Contributor - China
Tel: +86 10 6510 2206
Email: Isaac.zhao@crugroup.com
Deepak Chitroda, Contributor - India
Tel: +91 22 66875713
Email: deepak.chitroda@crugroup.com
Ben Farey, Editor in Chief
Direct Tel: +44 (0) 207 903 2015
Mobile: +44 (0) 7885557034
Email: ben.farey@crugroup.com
Subscriptions & Customer Services
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2146
Email: customer.services@crugroup.com
Legal Copyright Notice © 2015 CRU International Ltd
Please note: Access to and use of this product are restricted by copyright and other law to named authorised users of companies with valid licences to do so. Any other use is prohibited. The copyright of this product is held by CRU International Ltd. It is a breach of law to forward/share this product or any of its contents, including but not limited to, single prices to any person, whether in your company or otherwise, unless that person is an authorised user under a valid licence.
The commission of any unauthorised act in relation to this product may result in civil or criminal actions.
Disclaimer:
While all reasonable efforts are taken to ensure the reliability of the fertilizer pricing and freight pricing data, FW does not guarantee its accuracy or take liability for the results obtained by using the data.
Using FW prices in contracts: Many subscribers to Fertilizer Week use Fertilizer Week benchmark prices in their contracts. When both sides in a business arrangement agree in advance to use a set of prices it creates more certainty and saves everyone time – as long as the prices can be relied upon. Fertilizer Week publishes a regularly updated methodology document with detailed definitions of every price we publish. By understanding how we calculate our prices, you will be able to build your own scenarios based on these prices
For more detail on methodology view our Pricing Methodology Guide
CRU International Ltd. Registered in England No 940750.
Registered Office: Charles House, 108-110 Finchley Road, London, NW3 5JJ.
Tel: + 44 20 7903 2000 Fax: +44 20 7837 0976
www.crugroup.com
28 May | 2015
ANALYSIS
Asian prices inch up on tightness but markets overall stable
East Asian spot prices were assessed slightly higher, with the upper end of the price range moved up to $25/mt FOB Japan/South Korea.
Market tightness has resulted from Q1 turnarounds at some Asian smelters and the current turnarounds at Korea Zinc’s smelter at Onsan, South Korea and Glencore’s PASAR smelter in the Philippines.
Indian demand was a key driver for price increases, as spot enquiries from the country persisted, albeit at a slightly lower level than a month earlier. With recent business as high as $70/mt CFR and a continuing lack of spot availability, with sulphur-burnt product from China likely to come at an even higher price, $25/mt FOB was well achievable on some East Asian producers’ sales.
But it is not certain how long Indian spot demand will continue, and with Glencore’s PASAR smelter coming out of maintenance by the end of Q2 with some expansion likely, support for higher prices could diminish in the coming weeks.
However, an expected reduction in export volumes from Mexico’s Boleo will remove at least some marginal supply from the market.
Spot prices to Chile, meanwhile, were reported relatively stable in the $80s/mt CFR.
China’s April imports plunged 29.3% year on year, leaving total imports for the first four months of the year down 12.1% at 374,349 mt.
European spot prices for exports, on the other hand, continued to be assessed at $27-35/mt FOB Northwest Europe, with current business continuing at the levels of recent months.
Petrobras entered the market again and is believed to have bought in the high $80s/mt CFR, though the price was not confirmed and some believed it might be in the $90s/mt CFR.
A sale to Argentina reported in the $90s/mt CFR was also in line with business a month earlier.
Spot demand for imports to the US and Morocco was still lacking.
Highlights of the week:
∙Asian FOB prices up on tightness
∙Further Indian demand for prompt spot
∙Sales to Bunge Argentina reported in $90s/mt CFR
∙Petrobras returns to market with prices talked in high $80s/mt CFR
∙Boleo exports continue but likely to slow soon
∙Chilean business in $80s/mt CFR
∙Chinese imports for April plunge 29.3%
Base Metals
Base metals continued to decline and shed gains from the rally that took place earlier this month, as confidence remained shaky and macro data overall was not supportive. Dollar weakness in the latter part of the week should add some support to price levels. LME copper was down to $6,084.50/mt for cash.
DAP & Sulphur
This week's IFA meeting did not yield any news that would affect expectations for US phosphate production. This leaves sulphur and sulphuric acid suppliers with the same outlook as earlier this month for the US Gulf.
Sulphur markets were stable to slightly higher. Tasweeq moved its QSP up $2/mt to $141/mt FOB, roughly in line with expectations but fairly conservative, as spot business from the Middle East was reported in the mid- $140s/mt FOB and the seller's recent tender went at the low-to-mid-$140s/mt FOB. With the price announced and IFA discussion out of the way, activity is expected to pick up over the coming week.
Caprolactam
Caprolactam prices were stable at last week's level of $1,750-1800/mt CFR China following several weeks of increases to their highest levels since early January.
MARKETS
SULPHURIC ACID
NORTH AMERICA
Mexico: Exports from Boleo plant likely to decline in H2
The Boleo mine’s exports of sulphuric acid out of Santa Rosalia port are likely to decline from July onwards.
It exported around two cargoes of 18-20,000 mt per month so far this year, but this is likely to decline to around one cargo per month as it ramps up its plant.
Boleo began producing copper January 17, and has been a key source of marginal acid supply, with most cargoes going to Chile, although some material has gone to Brazil.
CRU estimates that Boleo’s maximum consumption of sulphuric acid this year would be around 350,000 mt, while it is able to produce twice that much.
Meanwhile, spot import price ideas in Mexico remain in the $80s/mt CFR following Fertinal's purchase of two 25,000 mt cargoes, one of which arrived at the beginning of May on the Sanga Breeze while the other was scheduled to load from South Korea on the Sea Onsam on May 20 for June arrival.
US: Spot imports lacking
US sulphuric acid prices remained assessed at $70-80/mt CFR, with no new business confirmed.
Although there was talk of some smaller trades, nothing was confirmed, and some traders said that US import business was currently dead.
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA
Brazil: Petrobras returns to sulphuric acid market
Petrobras entered the market for 15,000 mt of sulphuric acid intended for early July delivery.
Price were talked in the high $80s/mt CFR, though a final conclusion price was not confirmed and some traders believed it would may be in the $90s/mt CFR.
The buyer’s purchase of 15,000 mt in April for June delivery is understood to have been at $87/mt CFR, in line with Brazilian prices of recent months. Subsequent to this, Mosaic bought 12,000 mt in the mid-to-high $80s/mt CFR.
Chile: Spot business reported close to $80/mt CFR
Chilean spot prices remain pegged at $80-90/mt CFR, though most price ideas are at the lower end of this range.
Sources report that recent purchases have been close to $80/mt CFR. Demand has come from typical buyers such as BHP Billiton.
Argentina: Bunge heard buying in $90s/mt CFR
Bunge Argentina has again purchased sulphuric acid in the $90s/mt CFR, according to market sources.
This is in line with its previous purchase in March.
The company's acid requirements are driven by its SSP facilities in Ramallo.
In October, the buyer reportedly bought a parcel of around 12,000 mt at a price of approximately $110/mt CFR.
Argentinian imports for 2014 totalled 64,482 mt based on one purchase of 14-17,000 mt per quarter.
EUROPE
Europe: Spot stability persists in balanced market
European spot prices remained stable at an assessment of $27-35/mt FOB Northwest Europe, where they have been for approximately four months.
Recent sales to Brazil have remained at similar levels, and spot demand elsewhere for European product was lacking.
Despite limited spot availability, there has been little impetus for any price climbs.
Boliden is currently conducting maintenance at its Harjavalta smelter in Finland. It recently completed a short maintenance at its Kokkola smelter, and is planning a turnaround at its Rönnskär plant in September. The company recently reported increased Q1 production volumes.
The only other European smelter turnaround currently on the horizon in the region is Atlantic Copper’s Huelva site in September.
INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
India: Spot demand persists but diminishing
Indian demand remained a key driver of Asian sulphuric acid spot markets, with limited spot enquiry from elsewhere while availability remained tight.
Although traders saw Indian business slower than a month ago, a large buyer was seeking prompt June-July product.
IFFCO had two spot cargoes arriving, one of 21,000 mt on the Golden Unity at around $70/mt CFR with an ETA of May 27 from Qatar and another of 20,000 mt on the White Shark at around $60/mt CFR with an ETA of June 3.
ASIA AND OCEANIA
Japan/South Korea: Upper end of spot range up
The upper end of the East Asian spot price assessment was moved up slightly, with the range now at $17- 25/mt FOB Japan/South Korea.
The lack of spot availability and high CFR levels to India supported the increase, but it is not clear whether this will be sustained, as Indian spot demand has declined slightly in recent weeks and is likely to decline further, while spot demand from other sources is limited.
A lack of spot availability has arisen following Q1 turnarounds at Mitsubishi’s Naoshima smelter, LS Nikko’s Onsan smelter and Toho Zinc’s Onahama smelter.
The PASAR smelter in the Philippines shut April 16 for a turnaround of at least 60 days, and Korea Zinc’s Onsan smelter shut May 20 for a maintenance that is likely to last 30-45 days, though the length has yet to be confirmed.
China: Price rises in some regions on lower availability
Prices have increased slightly in Northern China and Zhejiang province because of low stock levels and price increases from sulphur burners, though increases were only RMB 20-30/mt FCA.
Demand in Zhejiang is mainly industrial, particularly for caprolactam and fluoric acid, and it is therefore less linked to markets elsewhere.
Turnarounds in Northern China, including an upcoming maintenance at Feishang Copper in Inner Mongolia, have also been supportive of prices.
China: April sulphuric acid imports drop 29%
China’s April imports of sulphuric acid plunged 29.3% year on year to 106,972 mt, leaving total imports for the first four months of the year down 12.1% at 374,349 mt.
Almost all of the April tonnes came from South Korea, though North Korea supplied 1,810 mt and Taiwan supplied 1,071 mt.
Brendan Daly, Editor - Global
Tel: + 44 (0) 20 7903 2185
Email: brendan.daly@crugroup.com
Isaac Zhao, Contributor - China
Tel: +86 10 6510 2206
Email: Isaac.zhao@crugroup.com
Deepak Chitroda, Contributor - India
Tel: +91 22 66875713
Email: deepak.chitroda@crugroup.com
Ben Farey, Editor in Chief
Direct Tel: +44 (0) 207 903 2015
Mobile: +44 (0) 7885557034
Email: ben.farey@crugroup.com
Subscriptions & Customer Services
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2146
Email: customer.services@crugroup.com
Legal Copyright Notice © 2015 CRU International Ltd
Please note: Access to and use of this product are restricted by copyright and other law to named authorised users of companies with valid licences to do so. Any other use is prohibited. The copyright of this product is held by CRU International Ltd. It is a breach of law to forward/share this product or any of its contents, including but not limited to, single prices to any person, whether in your company or otherwise, unless that person is an authorised user under a valid licence.
The commission of any unauthorised act in relation to this product may result in civil or criminal actions.
Disclaimer:
While all reasonable efforts are taken to ensure the reliability of the fertilizer pricing and freight pricing data, FW does not guarantee its accuracy or take liability for the results obtained by using the data.
Using FW prices in contracts: Many subscribers to Fertilizer Week use Fertilizer Week benchmark prices in their contracts. When both sides in a business arrangement agree in advance to use a set of prices it creates more certainty and saves everyone time – as long as the prices can be relied upon. Fertilizer Week publishes a regularly updated methodology document with detailed definitions of every price we publish. By understanding how we calculate our prices, you will be able to build your own scenarios based on these prices
For more detail on methodology view our Pricing Methodology Guide
CRU International Ltd. Registered in England No 940750.
Registered Office: Charles House, 108-110 Finchley Road, London, NW3 5JJ.
Tel: + 44 20 7903 2000 Fax: +44 20 7837 0976
www.crugroup.com



PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
All commodities  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |     |  W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UREA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Prilled Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China Spot  |  USD/t  |  303  |  245  |  267  |  292  |  275 - 285  |  288 - 293  |  293 - 298 297 - 303  |     |  4  |  
Black Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  338  |  253  |  259  |  280  |  268 - 280  |  275 - 283  |  275 - 285 284 - 287  |     |  6  |  
Baltic Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  335  |  245  |  253  |  277  |  263 - 273  |  272 - 279  |  278 - 283 280 - 285  |     |  2  |  
Bulgaria/Croatia/Romania Spot1  |  USD/t  |  355  |  265  |  272  |  288  |  280 - 285  |  280 - 285  |  288 - 295 295 - 298  |     |  5  |  
Middle East Spot1  |  USD/t  |  360  |  250  |  256  |  281  |  273 - 278  |  275 - 283  |  278 - 283 288 - 293  |     |  10  |  
Indonesia Spot1  |  USD/t  |  305  |  265  |  271  |  289  |  280 - 285  |  287 - 292  |  290 - 295 290 - 295  |     |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  350  |  260  |  287  |  288  |  275 - 280  |  285 - 295  |  285 - 295  |  295 - 295  |     |  5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Prilled Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Mediterranean (duty paid) Spot  |  USD/t  |  368  |  285  |  291  |  307  |  295 - 300  |  303 - 308  |  308 - 313 312 - 320  |     |  5  |  
India Spot  |  USD/t  |  329  |  266  |  274  |  292  |  266 - 272  |  298 - 301  |  298 - 301 298 - 301  |     |  0  |  
Vietnam Spot1  |  USD/t  |  323  |  270  |  288  |  305  |  290 - 295  |  295 - 305  |  308 - 313 315 - 320  |     |  7  |  
Philippines Spot1  |  USD/t  |  325  |  275  |  303  |  310  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 310  |  310 - 315 318 - 323  |     |  8  |  
EC Central America Spot1  |  USD/t  |  358  |  260  |  274  |  300  |  287 - 293  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305 303 - 308  |     |  3  |  
Brazil Spot1  |  USD/t  |  358  |  255  |  266  |  298  |  283 - 288  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305  |     |  0  |  
Granular Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  395  |  261  |  292  |  337  |  315 - 342  |  325 - 347  |  328 - 356 325 - 355  |     |  -2  |  
Black Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  375  |  255  |  267  |  292  |  283 - 288  |  288 - 292  |  290 - 295 295 - 307  |     |  8  |  
Baltic Spot  |  USD/t  |  375  |  255  |  267  |  293  |  280 - 285  |  288 - 292  |  290 - 295 298 - 312  |     |  12  |  
Middle East (non US netback) Spot  |  USD/t  |  372  |  240  |  258  |  307  |  285 - 305  |  308 - 315  |  308 - 315 308 - 315  |     |  0  |  
Middle East (US netback) Spot  |  USD/t  |  355  |  250  |  270  |  319  |  290 - 295  |  322 - 335  |  330 - 335 320 - 325  |     |  -10  |  
Middle East (all netbacks) Spot  |  USD/t  |  372  |  240  |  263  |  314  |  285 - 305  |  308 - 335  |  308 - 335 308 - 325  |     |  -5  |  
China Spot  |  USD/t  |  315  |  270  |  279  |  303  |  287 - 293 293 - 308 305 - 315 305 - 315  |     |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
www.crugroup.com  |     |     |     |     |     |  Weekly Overview Report  |  |  |  1  |  



   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W  |  
Egypt Spot  |  USD/t  |  390  |  275  |  284  |  304  |  290 - 290  |  290 - 312  |  295 - 317 317 - 320  |  13  |  
Algeria Spot1  |  USD/t  |  402  |  280  |  292  |  310  |  295 - 300  |  295 - 320  |  300 - 323 322 - 325  |  12  |  
North Africa Spot1  |  USD/t  |  402  |  275  |  289  |  308  |  290 - 300  |  290 - 320  |  295 - 323 317 - 325  |  12  |  
Malaysia Spot1  |  USD/t  |  335  |  260  |  275  |  304  |  285 - 300  |  295 - 310  |  305 - 315 305 - 315  |  0  |  
Indonesia Spot  |  USD/t  |  345  |  262  |  277  |  309  |  295 - 305  |  311 - 311  |  311 - 312 311 - 312  |  0  |  
Venezuela/Trinidad Spot1  |  USD/t  |  355  |  240  |  260  |  295  |  265 - 275  |  295 - 305  |  305 - 305 305 - 305  |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  430  |  322  |  349  |  376  |  375 - 395  |  370 - 375  |  370 - 375 370 - 375  |  0  |  
US Great Lakes Spot  |  USD/st  |  435  |  335  |  349  |  393  |  390 - 395  |  390 - 395  |  390 - 395 390 - 395  |  0  |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  450  |  320  |  332  |  366  |  355 - 370  |  355 - 365  |  355 - 365 370 - 390  |  20  |  
US Arkansas River Spot  |  USD/st  |  450  |  320  |  333  |  367  |  355 - 370  |  355 - 365  |  365 - 365 370 - 390  |  15  |  
US Texas Coast Spot  |  USD/st  |  440  |  320  |  334  |  370  |  365 - 370  |  365 - 370  |  365 - 370 370 - 385  |  10  |  
US South Spot  |  USD/st  |  420  |  325  |  332  |  360  |  350 - 350  |  350 - 355  |  365 - 365  |  370 - 375  |  8  |  
US East Coast Spot  |  USD/st  |  450  |  330  |  335  |  337  |  330 - 340  |  335 - 340  |  335 - 340  |  335 - 340  |  0  |  



SE Asia Spot1  |  USD/t  |  373  |  272  |  280  |  306  |  285 - 295  |  300 - 308  |  305 - 320 313 - 323  |  5  |  
South Korea Spot1  |  USD/t  |  360  |  278  |  282  |  309  |  285 - 295  |  303 - 308  |  315 - 320 320 - 325  |  5  |  
Brazil Spot  |  USD/t  |  390  |  259  |  271  |  318  |  288 - 303  |  320 - 330  |  323 - 328 323 - 328  |  0  |  
Mediterranean (duty paid) Spot  |  USD/t  |  397  |  295  |  306  |  323  |  305 - 315  |  310 - 320  |  328 - 338  |  330 - 340  |  2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk DEL  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Northern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  455  |  365  |  374  |  385  |  375 - 385  |  375 - 385  |  385 - 395 385 - 395  |  0  |  
US California Spot  |  USD/st  |  480  |  380  |  410  |  410  |  410 - 410  |  410 - 410  |  410 - 410 410 - 410  |  0  |  
US Pacific NW Spot  |  USD/st  |  480  |  410  |  415  |  415  |  410 - 420  |  410 - 420  |  410 - 420 410 - 420  |  0  |  
Canada West Spot  |  CAN/t  |  670  |  460  |  613  |  606  |  600 - 625  |  600 - 625  |  600 - 600  |  600 - 600  |  0  |  
Granular Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
France Spot  |  EUR/t  |  344  |  260  |  309  |  321  |  310 - 315  |  320 - 323  |  320 - 325  |  323 - 328  |  3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Prilled Bagged EXW  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China North Spot  |  RMB/t  |  1700  |  1380  |  1510  |  1598  |  1500 - 1600  |  1520 - 1640 1550 - 1650 1620 - 1700  |  60  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UAN  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Black Sea 32% Spot1  |  USD/t  |  257  |  180  |  223  |  185  |  180 - 190  |  180 - 190  |  180 - 190 180 - 190  |  0  |  
Baltic Spot1  |  USD/t  |  253  |  195  |  214  |  200  |  195 - 205  |  195 - 205 195 - 205 195 - 205  |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.63  |  10.00  |  10.08  |  9.56  |  10.00 - 10.16 9.10 - 9.53 9.22 - 9.63 9.22 - 9.63  |  0  |  
US Midwest East Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.63  |  10.00  |  10.08  |  9.56  |  10.00 - 10.16 9.10 - 9.53 9.22 - 9.63 9.22 - 9.63  |  0  |  
US Midwest West Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.63  |  10.00  |  10.08  |  9.56  |  10.00 - 10.16 9.10 - 9.53 9.22 - 9.63 9.22 - 9.63  |  0  |  
US East Coast Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.30  |  7.81  |  8.70  |  7.93  |  7.81 - 7.97 7.81 - 7.97 7.81 - 8.12 7.81 - 8.12  |  0  |  
US Pacific NW Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.10  |  9.10  |  9.95  |  9.53  |  9.90 - 10.00  |  9.90 - 10.00 9.10 - 9.10 9.10 - 9.10  |  0  |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.37  |  7.81  |  9.16  |  9.15  |  9.07 - 9.22 9.07 - 9.22 9.07 - 9.22 9.07 - 9.22  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge 32% Spot  |  USD/st  |  280  |  230  |  255  |  238  |  245 - 245  |  230 - 240  |  230 - 240 230 - 240  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/unit  |  8.75  |  7.18  |  7.96  |  7.42  |  7.66 - 7.66  |  7.18 - 7.50  |  7.18 - 7.50  |  7.18 - 7.50  |  0  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US East Coast 32% Spot1  |  USD/t  |  300  |  235  |  265  |  242  |  251 - 254  |  235 - 240  |  235 - 242  |  235 - 242  |  0  |  
Bulk DEL  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US California Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.70  |  8.91  |  9.68  |  9.33  |  9.65 - 9.70  |  9.65 - 9.70  |  8.91 - 9.06  |  8.91 - 9.06  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Rouen 30% Spot  |  EUR/t  |  238  |  178  |  229  |  189  |  185 - 190  |  185 - 190  |  185 - 190 192 - 194  |  5  |  
Germany 28% Spot1  |  EUR/t  |  210  |  166  |  208  |  208  |  205 - 210  |  205 - 210  |  205 - 210  |  205 - 210  |  0  |  
AMMONIUM SULPHATE  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  290  |  265  |  273  |  283  |  275 - 290  |  275 - 290  |  275 - 290  |  275 - 290  |  0  |  



   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  325  |  270  |  317  |  323  |  320 - 325  |  320 - 325  |  320 - 325  |  320 - 325  |  0  |  



Black Sea - steel grade Spot  |  USD/t  |  148  |  100  |  130  |  129  |  127 - 132  |  127 - 132  |  125 - 130 125 - 130  |  0  |  
Black Sea - caprolactam Spot1  |  USD/t  |  155  |  115  |  153  |  153  |  150 - 155  |  150 - 155  |  150 - 155 150 - 155  |  0  |  
China - caprolactam Spot  |  USD/t  |  135  |  111  |  128  |  131  |  130 - 130  |  130 - 130  |  130 - 135  |  130 - 135  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Standard Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Southeast Asia - caprolactam Spot  |  USD/t  |  165  |  136  |  151  |  159  |  155 - 165  |  155 - 165  |  155 - 165 150 - 160  |  -5  |  
Brazil - caprolactam Spot  |  USD/t  |  185  |  145  |  160  |  163  |  160 - 170  |  155 - 160  |  160 - 170  |  160 - 170  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
AMMONIUM NITRATE  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Black Sea Spot1  |  USD/t  |  290  |  200  |  224  |  205  |  200 - 205  |  200 - 210  |  205 - 210 203 - 210  |  -1  |  
Baltic Sea Spot1  |  USD/t  |  290  |  200  |  225  |  206  |  200 - 205  |  200 - 210  |  205 - 210 205 - 210  |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  355  |  340  |  348  |  353  |  350 - 355  |  350 - 355  |  350 - 355 350 - 355  |  0  |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  420  |  315  |  343  |  343  |  340 - 345  |  340 - 345  |  340 - 345 340 - 345  |  0  |  
US South East Spot  |  USD/st  |  390  |  320  |  320  |  320  |  320 - 320  |  320 - 320  |  320 - 320 320 - 320  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  385  |  220  |  287  |  264  |  220 - 285  |  260 - 275  |  260 - 275  |  260 - 275  |  0  |  
Bulk CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
France Spot1  |  EUR/t  |  355  |  285  |  353  |  319  |  350 - 355  |  350 - 355  |  285 - 285  |  285 - 285  |  0  |  
Bulk DEL  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US South Spot2  |  USD/st  |  440  |  0  |  333  |  333  |  330 - 335  |  330 - 335  |  330 - 335  |  330 - 335  |  0  |  
Bagged FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UK Spot  |  GBP/t  |  267  |  200  |  235  |  212  |  218 - 223  |  218 - 223  |  200 - 208 200 - 208  |  0  |  
France Spot1  |  EUR/t  |  335  |  225  |  305  |  255  |  275 - 285  |  275 - 285  |  225 - 235  |  225 - 235  |  0  |  
CAN  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk CIF  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Germany Spot  |  EUR/t  |  275  |  225  |  272  |  255  |  258 - 275  |  258 - 275  |  250 - 275 225 - 225  |  -38  |  
Benelux Spot  |  EUR/t  |  275  |  225  |  272  |  255  |  258 - 275  |  258 - 275  |  250 - 275  |  225 - 225  |  -38  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
AMMONIA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Black Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  625  |  380  |  403  |  389  |  390 - 400  |  385 - 395  |  380 - 390 380 - 390  |  0  |  
Baltic Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  615  |  390  |  413  |  398  |  410 - 410  |  395 - 400  |  390 - 400 390 - 390  |  -5  |  
Middle East Spot  |  USD/t  |  645  |  350  |  392  |  380  |  370 - 405  |  350 - 405  |  350 - 404 350 - 404  |  0  |  
Middle East (India) Contract  |  USD/t  |  580  |  380  |  421  |  396  |  400 - 410  |  380 - 405  |  380 - 405 380 - 405  |  0  |  
Middle East Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  645  |  350  |  409  |  381  |  370 - 410  |  350 - 405  |  350 - 405 350 - 405  |  0  |  
Caribbean Spot  |  USD/t  |  615  |  410  |  437  |  418  |  425 - 425  |  425 - 425  |  410 - 410 410 - 410  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  614  |  442  |  488  |  480  |  442 - 517  |  442 - 517  |  442 - 517 442 - 517  |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  670  |  540  |  617  |  615  |  605 - 625  |  605 - 625  |  605 - 625 605 - 625  |  0  |  
US Midwest East Spot  |  USD/st  |  670  |  560  |  622  |  623  |  620 - 625  |  620 - 625  |  620 - 625 620 - 625  |  0  |  
US Midwest West Spot  |  USD/st  |  670  |  540  |  615  |  615  |  605 - 625  |  605 - 625  |  605 - 625 605 - 625  |  0  |  
US Northern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  650  |  560  |  650  |  650  |  650 - 650  |  650 - 650  |  650 - 650 650 - 650  |  0  |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  610  |  500  |  600  |  600  |  590 - 610  |  590 - 610  |  590 - 610  |  590 - 610  |  0  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Southern Europe duty paid Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  700  |  440  |  472  |  456  |  445 - 470  |  445 - 470  |  440 - 470 440 - 470  |  0  |  
NW Europe duty paid Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  710  |  455  |  487  |  469  |  460 - 480  |  460 - 480  |  455 - 480 455 - 480  |  0  |  
Turkey Spot  |  USD/t  |  645  |  415  |  433  |  420  |  415 - 425  |  415 - 425  |  415 - 425 415 - 425  |  0  |  
Morocco Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  650  |  420  |  443  |  425  |  420 - 430  |  420 - 430  |  420 - 430 420 - 430  |  0  |  
India Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  640  |  410  |  436  |  431  |  410 - 450  |  410 - 450  |  410 - 450 415 - 450  |  3  |  
South Korea/Taiwan Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  700  |  433  |  474  |  449  |  449 - 470  |  433 - 460  |  433 - 460 433 - 450  |  -5  |  
Southeast Asia Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  670  |  437  |  463  |  448  |  455 - 455  |  450 - 450  |  450 - 450  |  437 - 437  |  -13  |  



   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W  |  
US Gulf Spot  |  USD/t  |  655  |  450  |  477  |  458  |  465 - 465  |  465 - 465  |  450 - 450 450 - 450  |  0  |  
US Tampa Spot  |  USD/t  |  655  |  450  |  477  |  458  |  465 - 465  |  465 - 465  |  450 - 450  |  450 - 450  |  0  |  
US NOLA/Texas Spot  |  USD/t  |  655  |  450  |  477  |  458  |  465 - 465  |  465 - 465  |  450 - 450  |  450 - 450  |  0  |  



US Midwest rail Spot  |  USD/st  |  620  |  540  |  592  |  590  |  580 - 600  |  580 - 600  |  580 - 600 580 - 600  |  0  |  
US California Spot  |  USD/st  |  600  |  580  |  590  |  590  |  580 - 600  |  580 - 600  |  580 - 600  |  580 - 600  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
DAP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Gulf/Tampa Spot  |  USD/t  |  511  |  440  |  464  |  470  |  460 - 465  |  468 - 472  |  474 - 474 474 - 474  |  0  |  
Saudi Arabia Spot1  |  USD/t  |  495  |  450  |  479  |  475  |  473 - 480  |  473 - 477  |  473 - 477 473 - 477  |  0  |  
Baltic/Black Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  520  |  430  |  478  |  486  |  465 - 500  |  470 - 500  |  470 - 500 480 - 500  |  5  |  
North Africa Spot  |  USD/t  |  540  |  450  |  498  |  498  |  480 - 510  |  487 - 510  |  487 - 510 487 - 510  |  0  |  
Morocco Spot  |  USD/t  |  535  |  470  |  498  |  498  |  480 - 510  |  487 - 510  |  487 - 510 487 - 510  |  0  |  
Tunisia Spot3  |  USD/t  |  540  |  450  |  512  |  510  |  510 - 510  |  510 - 510  |  510 - 510 510 - 510  |  0  |  
China Spot  |  USD/t  |  480  |  415  |  466  |  466  |  460 - 470  |  460 - 470  |  460 - 475 460 - 475  |  0  |  
Mexico Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  500  |  440  |  465  |  471  |  460 - 470  |  470 - 475  |  470 - 475 470 - 475  |  0  |  
Jordan Spot  |  USD/t  |  520  |  440  |  475  |  472  |  467 - 475  |  467 - 475  |  467 - 475 467 - 480  |  3  |  
Australia Spot1  |  USD/t  |  490  |  465  |  475  |  470  |  465 - 475  |  465 - 475  |  465 - 475 465 - 475  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  455  |  396  |  412  |  418  |  408 - 415  |  412 - 425  |  415 - 425 420 - 427  |  4  |  
US Central Florida Spot  |  USD/st  |  450  |  430  |  443  |  444  |  440 - 445  |  440 - 445  |  445 - 445 445 - 445  |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  510  |  450  |  463  |  461  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 460 460 - 460  |  0  |  
US Midwest East Spot  |  USD/st  |  500  |  450  |  463  |  461  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 460 460 - 460  |  0  |  
US Midwest West Spot  |  USD/st  |  510  |  450  |  463  |  461  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 460 460 - 460  |  0  |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  510  |  440  |  461  |  464  |  460 - 470  |  460 - 470  |  460 - 465 460 - 465  |  0  |  
US South Spot  |  USD/st  |  505  |  440  |  463  |  463  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India Spot  |  USD/t  |  505  |  450  |  482  |  479  |  476 - 484  |  476 - 482  |  476 - 482 476 - 482  |  0  |  
Pakistan Spot  |  USD/t  |  510  |  450  |  492  |  486  |  485 - 490  |  482 - 488  |  482 - 488 482 - 488  |  0  |  
Argentina/Uruguay Spot1  |  USD/t  |  538  |  460  |  481  |  498  |  485 - 495  |  495 - 505  |  495 - 505  |  500 - 505  |  3  |  
Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Terneuzen/Ghent Spot1  |  USD/t  |  580  |  520  |  528  |  528  |  525 - 530  |  525 - 530  |  525 - 530  |  525 - 530  |  0  |  
Bulk DEL  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US California Spot  |  USD/st  |  560  |  550  |  555  |  555  |  550 - 560  |  550 - 560  |  550 - 560 550 - 560  |  0  |  
US Northwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  570  |  550  |  560  |  560  |  550 - 570  |  550 - 570  |  550 - 570  |  550 - 570  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bagged CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China wholesale Spot  |  RMB/t  |  3050  |  2550  |  2925  |  2925  |  2900 - 2950 2900 - 2950 2900 - 2950 2900 - 2950  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bagged EXW  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China (excludes export sales) Spot  |  RMB/t  |  2700  |  2300  |  2575  |  2575  |  2550 - 2600 2550 - 2600 2550 - 2600 2550 - 2600  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
MAP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Gulf/Tampa Spot  |  USD/t  |  513  |  450  |  466  |  471  |  465 - 465  |  468 - 472  |  474 - 474 474 - 474  |  0  |  
Baltic/Black Sea Spot1  |  USD/t  |  510  |  440  |  463  |  474  |  465 - 475  |  470 - 475  |  470 - 475 480 - 485  |  10  |  
Morocco Spot  |  USD/t  |  535  |  475  |  498  |  500  |  482 - 510  |  487 - 515  |  487 - 515 487 - 515  |  0  |  
Mexico Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  500  |  445  |  465  |  471  |  460 - 470  |  470 - 475  |  470 - 475 470 - 475  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  475  |  0  |  414  |  428  |  425 - 425  |  425 - 435  |  420 - 435  |  425 - 437  |  3  |  
Granular Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil Spot  |  USD/t  |  540  |  460  |  477  |  493  |  480 - 492  |  490 - 500  |  490 - 500  |  495 - 500  |  3  |  
Bagged EXW  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China 11-44-0 (excludes export sales) Spot  |  RMB/t  |  2300  |  1700  |  1950  |  1950  |  1900 - 2000 1900 - 2000 1900 - 2000 1900 - 2000  |  0  |  



   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH LOW  |  2015 2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W  |  
China 10-50-0 (excludes export sales) Spot  |  RMB/t  |  2400  |  2000  |  2175 2200  |  2150 - 2250  |  2150 - 2250  |  2150 - 2250  |  2150 - 2250  |  0  |  



Morocco Spot  |  USD/t  |  430  |  370  |  380  |  389  |  380  |  - 380  |  380  |  - 405  |  380  |  - 405  |  380  |  - 405  |  0  |  
Tunisia Spot3  |  USD/t  |  420  |  365  |  380  |  380  |  380  |  - 380  |  380  |  - 380  |  380  |  - 380  |  380  |  - 380  |  0  |  
China Spot3  |  USD/t  |  355  |  280  |  300  |  303  |  280  |  - 320  |  280  |  - 320  |  280  |  - 320  |  300  |  - 320  |  10  |  
Granular Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil Spot3  |  USD/t  |  430  |  340  |  367  |  366  |  340  |  - 385  |  340  |  - 385  |  340  |  - 385  |  350  |  - 400  |  12  |  
Granular Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Benelux Spot3  |  USD/t  |  425  |  400  |  410  |  410  |  400  |  - 420  |  400  |  - 420  |  400  |  - 420  |  400  |  - 420  |  0  |  
SSP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil inland 18-20% P2O5 Spot  |  USD/t  |  320  |  280  |  298  |  298  |  280  |  - 315  |  280  |  - 315  |  280  |  - 315  |  280  |  - 315  |  0  |  
PHOSPHORIC ACID  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
North Africa Q2 2015 100% P2O5 Contract  |  USD/t  |  840  |  625  |  778  |  778  |  715  |  - 840  |  715  |  - 840  |  715  |  - 840  |  715  |  - 840  |  0  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India H1 2015 30 days 100% P2O5 Contract  |  USD/t  |  805  |  715  |  805  |  805  |  805  |  - 805  |  805  |  - 805  |  805  |  - 805  |  805  |  - 805  |  0  |  
NW Europe Q1 2015 100% P2O5  |  USD/t  |  990  |  835  |  945  |  945  |  900  |  - 990  |  900  |  - 990  |  900  |  - 990  |  900  |  - 990  |  0  |  
Spot/Contract  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
PHOSPHATE ROCK  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Morocco Q1 2015 (68-72% BPL) Contract  |  USD/t  |  120  |  100  |  115  |  115  |  110  |  - 120  |  110  |  - 120  |  110  |  - 120  |  110  |  - 120  |  0  |  
Jordan Q1 2015 (66-72% BPL) Contract  |  USD/t  |  124  |  100  |  112  |  114  |  105  |  - 118  |  105  |  - 118  |  105  |  - 118  |  120  |  - 124  |  10  |  
Jordan Q1 2015 (73-75% BPL) Contract  |  USD/t  |  137  |  115  |  133  |  133  |  128  |  - 137  |  128  |  - 137  |  128  |  - 137 130 - 137  |  1  |  
Egypt (60-68% BPL) Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  77  |  60  |  69  |  69  |  62 - 75  |  62 - 75  |  62 - 75  |  62 - 75  |  0  |  
Peru Q1 2015 (63-68% BPL) Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  100  |  70  |  94  |  94  |  88  |  - 100  |  88  |  - 100  |  88  |  - 100  |  88  |  - 100  |  0  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India Q1 2015 (71-75% BPL) Contract  |  USD/t  |  149  |  136  |  143  |  143  |  136  |  - 149  |  136  |  - 149  |  136  |  - 149  |  136  |  - 149  |  0  |  
India H2 (65-70% BPL) Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  135  |  93  |  115  |  115  |  95  |  - 135  |  95  |  - 135  |  95  |  - 135  |  95  |  - 135  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
NPKS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Baltic Sea 16-16-16 Spot1  |  USD/t  |  375  |  330  |  345  |  345  |  340  |  - 350  |  340  |  - 350  |  340  |  - 350  |  340  |  - 350  |  0  |  
Baltic Sea 15-15-15 Spot1  |  USD/t  |  365  |  325  |  330  |  330  |  325  |  - 335  |  325  |  - 335  |  325  |  - 335  |  325  |  - 335  |  0  |  
Baltic/Black Sea 10-26-26 Spot1  |  USD/t  |  410  |  0  |  405  |  405  |  400  |  - 410  |  400  |  - 410  |  400  |  - 410  |  400  |  - 410  |  0  |  
Bulk CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
France 17-17-17 Spot1  |  EUR/t  |  365  |  345  |  363  |  363  |  360  |  - 365  |  360  |  - 365  |  360  |  - 365  |  360  |  - 365  |  0  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China 16-16-16 Spot1  |  USD/t  |  405  |  350  |  395  |  395  |  385  |  - 405  |  385  |  - 405  |  385  |  - 405  |  385  |  - 405  |  0  |  
Southeast Asia 16-16-16 Spot3  |  USD/t  |  420  |  360  |  405  |  407  |  395  |  - 415  |  395  |  - 415  |  395  |  - 415  |  405  |  - 420  |  8  |  
India 10-26-26 Spot  |  USD/t  |  440  |  0  |  435  |  423  |  420  |  - 425  |  420  |  - 425  |  420  |  - 425  |  420  |  - 425  |  0  |  
Bulk CIF  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Germany 15-15-15 Spot1  |  EUR/t  |  330  |  315  |  320  |  320  |  315  |  - 325  |  315  |  - 325  |  315  |  - 325  |  315  |  - 325  |  0  |  
Bagged CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UK 20-10-10 Spot  |  GBP/t  |  315  |  305  |  310  |  310  |  305  |  - 315  |  305  |  - 315  |  305  |  - 315  |  305  |  - 315  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bagged EXW  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China 15-15-15-Cl (excludes export sales)  |  RMB/t  |  2100  |  1700  |  1815  |  1825  |  1750 - 1900 1750 - 1900 1750 - 1900 1750 - 1900  |  0  |  
Spot  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China 15-15-15-S (excludes export sales)  |  RMB/t  |  2400  |  2100  |  2210  |  2200  |  2150 - 2250 2150 - 2250 2150 - 2250 2150 - 2250  |  0  |  



   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH LOW  |  2015 2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W  |  



Vancouver Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  330  |  281  |  307  |  307  |  293 - 320 293 - 320  |  293 - 320 293 - 320  |  0  |  
Jordan/Israel Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  333  |  271  |  300  |  300  |  290 - 310 290 - 310  |  290 - 310 290 - 310  |  0  |  
Baltic Sea Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  333  |  266  |  289  |  289  |  278 - 300  |  278 - 300  |  278 - 300  |  278 - 300  |  0  |  
Standard Bulk CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China/Russia cross border Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  305  |  300  |  303  |  303  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305  |  0  |  
Standard Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China Contract  |  USD/t  |  315  |  305  |  315  |  315  |  315 - 315 315 - 315  |  315 - 315 315 - 315  |  0  |  
India 180 days Contract  |  USD/t  |  332  |  322  |  322  |  332  |  332 - 332 332 - 332  |  332 - 332 332 - 332  |  0  |  
Southeast Asia Spot  |  USD/t  |  350  |  290  |  330  |  331  |  315 - 345  |  315 - 345  |  315 - 350  |  310 - 350  |  -3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Standard Bagged FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China port wholesale Spot  |  RMB/t  |  2200  |  1930  |  2098  |  2070  |  2000 - 2150 2000 - 2150 2000 - 2130 2000 - 2130  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vancouver Spot1  |  USD/t  |  345  |  290  |  315  |  315  |  300 - 330 300 - 330  |  300 - 330 300 - 330  |  0  |  
Baltic Sea Spot1  |  USD/t  |  353  |  256  |  310  |  310  |  290 - 329 290 - 329  |  290 - 329 290 - 329  |  0  |  
US Carlsbad Spot1  |  USD/st  |  410  |  350  |  397  |  389  |  380 - 398 380 - 398  |  380 - 398 380 - 398  |  0  |  
Saskatchewan Spot  |  USD/st  |  375  |  355  |  375  |  375  |  375 - 375 375 - 375  |  375 - 375 375 - 375  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  375  |  325  |  345  |  333  |  340 - 345 325 - 340  |  325 - 340 325 - 325  |  -8  |  
US Midwest East Spot  |  USD/st  |  415  |  380  |  395  |  393  |  390 - 400 390 - 400  |  390 - 390 390 - 390  |  0  |  
US Midwest West Spot  |  USD/st  |  415  |  375  |  394  |  391  |  390 - 400 390 - 400  |  385 - 390 385 - 390  |  0  |  
US South Spot  |  USD/st  |  410  |  370  |  393  |  384  |  380 - 390  |  380 - 390  |  380 - 390  |  380 - 380  |  -5  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil Spot  |  USD/t  |  380  |  325  |  335  |  334  |  325 - 340  |  330 - 340  |  330 - 340  |  330 - 340  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk CIF  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
NW Europe Spot/Contract1  |  EUR/t  |  315  |  250  |  305  |  309  |  300 - 310  |  305 - 315  |  305 - 315  |  305 - 315  |  0  |  
Granular Bulk DEL  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Midwest barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  380  |  0  |  363  |  363  |  360 - 365  |  360 - 365  |  360 - 365  |  360 - 365  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
SOP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Standard Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
NW Europe Spot/Contract1  |  EUR/t  |  500  |  410  |  460  |  465  |  450 - 470  |  450 - 470  |  450 - 470  |  460 - 500  |  20  |  
SULPHUR4  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vancouver Spot1  |  USD/t  |  175  |  125  |  149  |  130  |  125 - 135 125 - 135  |  125 - 135 125 - 135  |  0  |  
Vancouver Q1 2015 Contract1  |  USD/t  |  160  |  135  |  155  |  155  |  150 - 160 150 - 160  |  150 - 160 150 - 160  |  0  |  
Middle East Spot1  |  USD/t  |  187  |  119  |  149  |  140  |  139 - 140 139 - 140  |  139 - 140 140 - 145  |  3  |  
Middle East Q2 2015 Contract  |  USD/t  |  178  |  140  |  164  |  154  |  150 - 178 142 - 158  |  142 - 158 142 - 158  |  0  |  
Adnoc Monthly May 2015 Contract  |  USD/t  |  180  |  135  |  140  |  140  |  140 - 140 140 - 140  |  140 - 140 140 - 140  |  0  |  
Tasweeq QSP Monthly May 2015 Contract  |  USD/t  |  182  |  119  |  144  |  140  |  139 - 139 139 - 139  |  139 - 139 141 - 141  |  2  |  
Black Sea Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  140  |  110  |  135  |  128  |  130 - 140  |  120 - 130  |  120 - 130  |  120 - 130  |  0  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China (crushed lump & gran) Spot1  |  USD/t  |  192  |  125  |  146  |  149  |  130 - 160 140 - 160  |  140 - 160 140 - 160  |  0  |  
India ex Middle East Spot1  |  USD/t  |  200  |  143  |  165  |  165  |  160 - 170 160 - 170  |  160 - 170 160 - 170  |  0  |  
North Africa Q1 2015 Contract  |  USD/t  |  165  |  160  |  163  |  163  |  160 - 165 160 - 165  |  160 - 165 160 - 165  |  0  |  
Mediterranean (excl. domestic contracts)  |  USD/t  |  155  |  125  |  136  |  133  |  130 - 135  |  130 - 135  |  130 - 135  |  130 - 135  |  0  |  
Spot1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Mediterranean (incl. North Africa) Spot2  |  USD/t  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0  |  
Brazil Spot1  |  USD/t  |  200  |  140  |  163  |  155  |  150 - 160  |  150 - 160  |  150 - 160  |  150 - 160  |  0  |  



   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |     |  28  |     |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
HIGH LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk EXW  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China Spot  |  RMB/t  |  1390  |  1000  |  1080  |  1093  |  1000 - 1100 1050 - 1150 1050 - 1170 1050 - 1170  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China port Spot  |  RMB/t  |  1380  |  1000  |  1180  |  1150  |  1120 - 1180 1120 - 1180 1120 - 1180 1120 - 1180  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Liquid Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Tampa Q2 2015 Contract  |  USD/lt  |  147  |  129  |  138  |  132  |  132 - 132  |  132 - 132  |  132 - 132  |  132 - 132  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Liquid Bulk CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
NW Europe Q2 2015 - truckload Contract  |  USD/t  |  200  |  170  |  185  |  185  |  170 - 200  |  170 - 200  |  170 - 200  |  170 - 200  |  0  |  
Liquid Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Benelux Q2 2015 - barge/railcar Contract  |  USD/t  |  170  |  158  |  164  |  164  |  158 - 170  |  158 - 170  |  158 - 170  |  158 - 170  |  0  |  
SULPHURIC ACID  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
NW Europe 30 days Spot1  |  USD/t  |  35  |  10  |  31  |  31  |  27 - 35  |  27 - 35  |  27 - 35  |  27 - 35  |  0  |  
Japan/South Korea Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  25  |  10  |  20  |  20  |  17 - 22  |  17 - 22  |  17 - 22  |  17 - 25  |  1  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chile Spot1  |  USD/t  |  90  |  60  |  85  |  85  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  0  |  
Chile Contract  |  USD/t  |  85  |  60  |  80  |  80  |  75 - 85  |  75 - 85  |  75 - 85  |  75 - 85  |  0  |  
NW Europe Q2 2015 Contract  |  EUR/t  |  80  |  55  |  69  |  69  |  57 - 80  |  57 - 80  |  57 - 80  |  57 - 80  |  0  |  
Turkey Spot1  |  USD/t  |  50  |  25  |  45  |  45  |  40 - 50  |  40 - 50  |  40 - 50  |  40 - 50  |  0  |  
Tunisia Contract2  |  USD/t  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0  |  
US Gulf Spot  |  USD/t  |  85  |  45  |  75  |  75  |  70 - 80  |  70 - 80  |  70 - 80  |  70 - 80  |  0  |  
Brazil Spot  |  USD/t  |  95  |  48  |  85  |  85  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



All commodities1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  52 WK 52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Route  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |     |  W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UREA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Yuzhnyy - Turkey 10-15,000 mt 8,000c / 3,000c  |  USD/t  |  20  |  12  |  15  |  13  |  15 - 17 12 - 14 12 - 14 12 - 14  |     |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - Mundra 55-60,000 mt 10,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  28  |  18  |  19  |  20  |  20 - 22 19 - 21 19 - 21 19 - 21  |     |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - WC India 35-45,000 mt 10,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  34  |  21  |  22  |  24  |  23 - 25 23 - 25 23 - 25 23 - 25  |     |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - Brazil 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000c  |  USD/t  |  31  |  17  |  19  |  19  |  18 - 20 19 - 21 19 - 21 19 - 21  |     |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - EC Mexico 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 3,000c  |  USD/t  |  33  |  19  |  21  |  21  |  20 - 22 21 - 23 21 - 23 21 - 23  |     |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - WC Mexico 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 4,000c  |  USD/t  |  50  |  33  |  35  |  35  |  34 - 36 34 - 36 34 - 36 34 - 36  |     |  0  |  
Baltic - WC India 35-45,000 mt 8,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  45  |  27  |  31  |  33  |  32 - 34 33 - 35 33 - 35 31 - 33  |     |  -2  |  
Baltic - Brazil 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000c  |  USD/t  |  31  |  15  |  21  |  21  |  21 - 23 22 - 24 20 - 22 19 - 21  |     |  -1  |  
Baltic - EC Mexico 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 3,000c  |  USD/t  |  31  |  17  |  22  |  22  |  22 - 24 23 - 25 21 - 23 21 - 23  |     |  0  |  
Baltic - WC Mexico 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 4,000c  |  USD/t  |  49  |  29  |  34  |  35  |  34 - 36 34 - 36 34 - 36 34 - 36  |     |  0  |  
Middle East - WC India 15-25,000 mt 6,000x / 6,000x  |  USD/t  |  21  |  11  |  12  |  12  |  12 - 14 11 - 13 11 - 13 11 - 13  |     |  0  |  
Middle East - Vietnam 20-25,000 mt 6,000x / 2,500x  |  USD/t  |  35  |  18  |  19  |  20  |  19 - 21 19 - 21 19 - 21 19 - 21  |     |  0  |  
Middle East - Miss River, US 40-45,000 mt 6,000x / 8,000c  |  USD/t  |  32  |  20  |  21  |  23  |  22 - 24 22 - 24 22 - 24 22 - 24  |     |  0  |  
North China - EC India 20-25,000 mt 3,000c / 5,000x  |  USD/t  |  26  |  18  |  22  |  22  |  21 - 23 20 - 22 22 - 24 23 - 25  |     |  1  |  
China - US Gulf 50-55,000 mt 5,000c / 10000c  |  USD/t  |  25  |  14  |  18  |  17  |  17 - 19 15 - 17 16 - 18 16 - 18  |     |  0  |  
Egypt - US Gulf 40-45,000 mt 6,000x / 8000c  |  USD/t  |  23  |  10  |  15  |  16  |  16 - 18 16 - 18 15 - 17 14 - 16  |     |  -1  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
www.crugroup.com  |     |     |     |  Weekly Overview Report  |  |  |  7  |  



   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Route  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W  |  



Black Sea - EC US 17-27,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  43  |  27  |  40  |  40  |  39 - 42 39 - 42 39 - 42 39 - 42  |  0  |  
Black Sea - French Atlantic 17-27,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  35  |  20  |  32  |  32  |  30 - 34 30 - 34 30 - 34 30 - 34  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
AMMONIA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Yuzhnyy - US Tampa 38-40,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  95  |  65  |  83  |  87  |  81 - 91 81 - 91 81 - 91 85 - 95  |  4  |  
Yuzhnyy - NW Europe 22-24,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  77  |  60  |  74  |  73  |  72 - 77 72 - 77 72 - 77 70 - 75  |  -2  |  
Yuzhnyy - S Europe 13-15,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  61  |  50  |  58  |  58  |  56 - 61 56 - 61 56 - 61 55 - 60  |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - Morocco 22-24,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  67  |  45  |  64  |  61  |  62 - 67 62 - 67 62 - 67 50 - 60  |  -9  |  
Baltic - NW Europe 13-15,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  41  |  28  |  38  |  38  |  36 - 41 36 - 41 36 - 41 36 - 41  |  0  |  
Middle East - WC India 22-24,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  55  |  35  |  42  |  42  |  38 - 48 38 - 48 38 - 48 36 - 46  |  -2  |  
Middle East - EC India 22-24,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  75  |  45  |  62  |  61  |  58 - 68 58 - 68 58 - 68 52 - 62  |  -6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
DAP-MAP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Tampa - Brazil 20-25,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000c  |  USD/t  |  24  |  15  |  17  |  16  |  16 - 18 16 - 18 15 - 17 15 - 17  |  0  |  
Tampa - Pakistan 35-40,000 mt 8,000c / 3,500x  |  USD/t  |  64  |  31  |  34  |  35  |  35 - 37 34 - 36 34 - 36 34 - 36  |  0  |  
Tampa - WC India 50-60,000 mt 8,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  44  |  23  |  26  |  26  |  26 - 28 26 - 28 24 - 26 24 - 26  |  0  |  
Baltic - Brazil 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000c  |  USD/t  |  31  |  15  |  21  |  21  |  21 - 23 22 - 24 20 - 22 19 - 21  |  -1  |  
Red Sea - WC India 15-25,000 mt 8,000x / 6,000x  |  USD/t  |  27  |  15  |  17  |  16  |  16 - 18 16 - 18 16 - 18 15 - 17  |  -1  |  
Tunisia - Pakistan 25-30,000 mt 6,000x / 3,500x  |  USD/t  |  43  |  26  |  28  |  30  |  29 - 31 29 - 31 29 - 31 29 - 31  |  0  |  
Tunisia - Turkey 10-15,000 mt 6,000x / 3,000c  |  USD/t  |  20  |  12  |  15  |  13  |  15 - 17 12 - 14 12 - 14 12 - 14  |  0  |  
Morocco - Brazil 25-30,000 mt 7,500x / 5,000c  |  USD/t  |  20  |  11  |  13  |  12  |  12 - 14 11 - 13 12 - 14 12 - 14  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
MOP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vancouver - India 45-50,000 mt 10,000c / 5,000x  |  USD/t  |  38  |  24  |  27  |  28  |  26 - 28 27 - 29 27 - 29 28 - 30  |  1  |  
Vancouver - China 50-60,000 mt 12,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  25  |  11  |  15  |  15  |  15 - 17 14 - 16 14 - 16 15 - 17  |  1  |  
Vancouver - SE Asia 30-40,000 mt 12,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  34  |  18  |  20  |  21  |  20 - 22 20 - 22 20 - 22 20 - 22  |  0  |  
Vancouver - Brazil 40-50,000 mt 12,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  37  |  19  |  21  |  23  |  21 - 23 23 - 25 23 - 25 23 - 25  |  0  |  
Baltic - WC India 35-45,000 mt 8,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  45  |  27  |  31  |  33  |  32 - 34 33 - 35 33 - 35 31 - 33  |  -2  |  
Baltic - China 50-60,000 mt 8,000c / 6,000c  |  USD/t  |  41  |  22  |  26  |  28  |  28 - 30 28 - 30 26 - 28 26 - 28  |  0  |  
Baltic - SE Asia 30-35,000 mt 8,000c / 3,000x  |  USD/t  |  57  |  33  |  36  |  38  |  37 - 39 39 - 41 38 - 40 37 - 39  |  -1  |  
Baltic - Brazil 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000c  |  USD/t  |  31  |  15  |  21  |  21  |  21 - 23 22 - 24 20 - 22 19 - 21  |  -1  |  
Red Sea - China 50-55,000 mt 8,000x / 5,000x  |  USD/t  |  27  |  12  |  13  |  13  |  12 - 14 13 - 15 13 - 15 13 - 15  |  0  |  
Red Sea - WC India 15-25,000 mt 8,000x / 6,000x  |  USD/t  |  27  |  15  |  17  |  16  |  16 - 18 16 - 18 16 - 18 15 - 17  |  -1  |  
Red Sea - SE Asia 25-30,000 mt 8,000x / 1,500x  |  USD/t  |  45  |  25  |  27  |  26  |  27 - 29 25 - 27 25 - 27 25 - 27  |  0  |  
Ashdod - Brazil 30-35,000 mt 6,000x / 5,000c  |  USD/t  |  26  |  13  |  14  |  16  |  15 - 17 15 - 17 15 - 17 15 - 17  |  0  |  
SULPHUR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vancouver - China 50-60,000 mt 12,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  25  |  11  |  15  |  15  |  15 - 17 14 - 16 14 - 16 15 - 17  |  1  |  
Vancouver - Brazil 40-50,000 mt 12,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  37  |  19  |  21  |  23  |  21 - 23 23 - 25 23 - 25 23 - 25  |  0  |  
Middle East - WC India 15-25,000 mt 8,000x / 6,000x  |  USD/t  |  21  |  11  |  12  |  12  |  12 - 14 11 - 13 11 - 13 11 - 13  |  0  |  
Middle East - China 30-35,000 mt 8,000x / 6,000x  |  USD/t  |  26  |  14  |  15  |  16  |  15 - 17 15 - 17 15 - 17 15 - 17  |  0  |  
Middle East - Morocco 35-40,000 mt 10,000c / 5,000x  |  USD/t  |  32  |  21  |  22  |  23  |  22 - 24 22 - 24 22 - 24 22 - 24  |  0  |  
Black Sea - Morocco 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000x  |  USD/t  |  20  |  12  |  13  |  13  |  12 - 14 12 - 14 12 - 14 12 - 14  |  0  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Weekly Overview Report | 8  |  



PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Urea  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |     |     |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W-on-W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UREA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Prilled Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China Spot  |  USD/t  |  303  |  245  |  267  |  292  |  275 - 285  |  288 - 293 293 - 298  |  297 - 303  |     |  4  |  
Black Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  338  |  253  |  259  |  280  |  268 - 280  |  275 - 283 275 - 285  |  284 - 287  |     |  6  |  
Baltic Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  335  |  245  |  253  |  277  |  263 - 273  |  272 - 279 278 - 283  |  280 - 285  |     |  2  |  
Bulgaria/Croatia/Romania Spot1  |  USD/t  |  355  |  265  |  272  |  288  |  280 - 285  |  280 - 285 288 - 295  |  295 - 298  |     |  5  |  
Middle East Spot1  |  USD/t  |  360  |  250  |  256  |  281  |  273 - 278  |  275 - 283 278 - 283  |  288 - 293  |     |  10  |  
Indonesia Spot1  |  USD/t  |  305  |  265  |  271  |  289  |  280 - 285  |  287 - 292 290 - 295  |  290 - 295  |     |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  350  |  260  |  287  |  288  |  275 - 280  |  285 - 295  |  285 - 295  |  295 - 295  |     |  5  |  
Prilled Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Mediterranean (duty paid) Spot  |  USD/t  |  368  |  285  |  291  |  307  |  295 - 300  |  303 - 308 308 - 313  |  312 - 320  |     |  5  |  
India Spot  |  USD/t  |  329  |  266  |  274  |  292  |  266 - 272  |  298 - 301 298 - 301  |  298 - 301  |     |  0  |  
Vietnam Spot1  |  USD/t  |  323  |  270  |  288  |  305  |  290 - 295  |  295 - 305 308 - 313  |  315 - 320  |     |  7  |  
Philippines Spot1  |  USD/t  |  325  |  275  |  303  |  310  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 310 310 - 315  |  318 - 323  |     |  8  |  
EC Central America Spot1  |  USD/t  |  358  |  260  |  274  |  300  |  287 - 293  |  300 - 305 300 - 305  |  303 - 308  |     |  3  |  
Brazil Spot1  |  USD/t  |  358  |  255  |  266  |  298  |  283 - 288  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305  |     |  0  |  
Granular Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  395  |  261  |  292  |  337  |  315 - 342  |  325 - 347 328 - 356  |  325 - 355  |     |  -2  |  
Black Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  375  |  255  |  267  |  292  |  283 - 288  |  288 - 292 290 - 295  |  295 - 307  |     |  8  |  
Baltic Spot  |  USD/t  |  375  |  255  |  267  |  293  |  280 - 285  |  288 - 292 290 - 295  |  298 - 312  |     |  12  |  
Middle East (non US netback)  |  USD/t  |  372  |  240  |  258  |  307  |  285 - 305  |  308 - 315  |  308 - 315  |  308 - 315  |     |  0  |  
Spot  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Middle East (US netback) Spot  |  USD/t  |  355  |  250  |  270  |  319  |  290 - 295  |  322 - 335 330 - 335  |  320 - 325  |     |  -10  |  
Middle East (all netbacks) Spot  |  USD/t  |  372  |  240  |  263  |  314  |  285 - 305  |  308 - 335 308 - 335  |  308 - 325  |     |  -5  |  
China Spot  |  USD/t  |  315  |  270  |  279  |  303  |  287 - 293 293 - 308  |  305 - 315  |  305 - 315  |     |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
www.crugroup.com  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Urea Weekly Report  |  |  |  1  |  



   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |     |  07  |     |  14  |     |  21  |     |  28  |     |     |     |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |     |  MAY  |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |  W-on-W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Egypt Spot  |  USD/t  |  390  |  275  |  284  |  304  |  290 - 290  |  290 - 312 295 - 317  |  317 - 320  |     |     |  13  |  
Algeria Spot1  |  USD/t  |  402  |  280  |  292  |  310  |  295 - 300  |  295 - 320 300 - 323  |  322 - 325  |     |     |  12  |  
North Africa Spot1  |  USD/t  |  402  |  275  |  289  |  308  |  290 - 300  |  290 - 320 295 - 323  |  317 - 325  |     |     |  12  |  
Malaysia Spot1  |  USD/t  |  335  |  260  |  275  |  304  |  285 - 300  |  295 - 310 305 - 315  |  305 - 315  |     |     |  0  |  
Indonesia Spot  |  USD/t  |  345  |  262  |  277  |  309  |  295 - 305  |  311 - 311 311 - 312  |  311 - 312  |     |     |  0  |  
Venezuela/Trinidad Spot1  |  USD/t  |  355  |  240  |  260  |  295  |  265 - 275  |  295 - 305 305 - 305  |  305 - 305  |     |     |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  430  |  322  |  349  |  376  |  375 - 395  |  370 - 375 370 - 375  |  370 - 375  |     |     |  0  |  
US Great Lakes Spot  |  USD/st  |  435  |  335  |  349  |  393  |  390 - 395  |  390 - 395 390 - 395  |  390 - 395  |     |     |  0  |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  450  |  320  |  332  |  366  |  355 - 370  |  355 - 365 355 - 365  |  370 - 390  |     |     |  20  |  
US Arkansas River Spot  |  USD/st  |  450  |  320  |  333  |  367  |  355 - 370  |  355 - 365 365 - 365  |  370 - 390  |     |     |  15  |  
US Texas Coast Spot  |  USD/st  |  440  |  320  |  334  |  370  |  365 - 370  |  365 - 370 365 - 370  |  370 - 385  |     |     |  10  |  
US South Spot  |  USD/st  |  420  |  325  |  332  |  360  |  350 - 350  |  350 - 355 365 - 365  |  370 - 375  |     |     |  8  |  
US East Coast Spot  |  USD/st  |  450  |  330  |  335  |  337  |  330 - 340  |  335 - 340  |  335 - 340  |  335 - 340  |     |     |  0  |  
Granular Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
SE Asia Spot1  |  USD/t  |  373  |  272  |  280  |  306  |  285 - 295  |  300 - 308 305 - 320  |  313 - 323  |     |     |  5  |  
South Korea Spot1  |  USD/t  |  360  |  278  |  282  |  309  |  285 - 295  |  303 - 308 315 - 320  |  320 - 325  |     |     |  5  |  
Brazil Spot  |  USD/t  |  390  |  259  |  271  |  318  |  288 - 303  |  320 - 330 323 - 328  |  323 - 328  |     |     |  0  |  
Mediterranean (duty paid) Spot  |  USD/t  |  397  |  295  |  306  |  323  |  305 - 315  |  310 - 320  |  328 - 338  |  330 - 340  |     |     |  2  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk DEL  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Northern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  455  |  365  |  374  |  385  |  375 - 385  |  375 - 385 385 - 395  |  385 - 395  |     |     |  0  |  
US California Spot  |  USD/st  |  480  |  380  |  410  |  410  |  410 - 410  |  410 - 410 410 - 410  |  410 - 410  |     |     |  0  |  
US Pacific NW Spot  |  USD/st  |  480  |  410  |  415  |  415  |  410 - 420  |  410 - 420 410 - 420  |  410 - 420  |     |     |  0  |  
Canada West Spot  |  CAN/t  |  670  |  460  |  613  |  606  |  600 - 625  |  600 - 625  |  600 - 600  |  600 - 600  |     |     |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
France Spot  |  EUR/t  |  344  |  260  |  309  |  321  |  310 - 315  |  320 - 323  |  320 - 325  |  323 - 328  |     |     |  3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Prilled Bagged EXW  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China North Spot  |  RMB/t  |  1700  |  1380  |  1510  |  1598  |  1500 - 1600 1520 - 1640 1550 - 1650 1620 - 1700  |     |     |  60  |  
Notes: (1) Indicative Price  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY FREIGHTS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UREA1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  52 WK 52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |     |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Route  |     |     |     |  Unit  |  HIGH LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |     |  W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UREA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Yuzhnyy - Turkey 10-15,000 mt 8,000c / 3,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  20  |  12  |  15  |  13  |  15 - 17 12 - 14 12 - 14 12 - 14  |     |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - Mundra 55-60,000 mt 10,000c / 10,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  28  |  18  |  19  |  20  |  20 - 22 19 - 21 19 - 21 19 - 21  |     |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - WC India 35-45,000 mt 10,000c / 10,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  34  |  21  |  22  |  24  |  23 - 25 23 - 25 23 - 25 23 - 25  |     |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - Brazil 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  31  |  17  |  19  |  19  |  18 - 20 19 - 21 19 - 21 19 - 21  |     |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - EC Mexico 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 3,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  33  |  19  |  21  |  21  |  20 - 22 21 - 23 21 - 23 21 - 23  |     |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - WC Mexico 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 4,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  50  |  33  |  35  |  35  |  34 - 36 34 - 36 34 - 36 34 - 36  |     |  0  |  
Baltic - WC India 35-45,000 mt 8,000c / 10,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  45  |  27  |  31  |  33  |  32 - 34 33 - 35 33 - 35 31 - 33  |     |  -2  |  
Baltic - Brazil 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000c  |     |     |  USD/t  |  31  |  15  |  21  |  21  |  21 - 23 22 - 24 20 - 22 19 - 21  |     |  -1  |  
Baltic - EC Mexico 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 3,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  31  |  17  |  22  |  22  |  22 - 24 23 - 25 21 - 23 21 - 23  |     |  0  |  
Baltic - WC Mexico 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 4,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  49  |  29  |  34  |  35  |  34 - 36 34 - 36 34 - 36 34 - 36  |     |  0  |  
Middle East - WC India 15-25,000 mt 6,000x / 6,000x  |     |  USD/t  |  21  |  11  |  12  |  12  |  12 - 14 11 - 13 11 - 13 11 - 13  |     |  0  |  
Middle East - Vietnam 20-25,000 mt 6,000x / 2,500x  |     |  USD/t  |  35  |  18  |  19  |  20  |  19 - 21 19 - 21 19 - 21 19 - 21  |     |  0  |  
Middle East - Miss River, US 40-45,000 mt 6,000x / 8,000c  |  USD/t  |  32  |  20  |  21  |  23  |  22 - 24 22 - 24 22 - 24 22 - 24  |     |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
www.crugroup.com  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Urea Weekly Report  |  |  |  2  |  



   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |     |  14  |     |  21  |     |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Route  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
North China - EC India 20-25,000 mt 3,000c / 5,000x  |  USD/t  |  26  |  18  |  22  |  22  |  21 - 23  |  20  |  - 22 22  |  - 24 23  |  - 25  |  1  |  
China - US Gulf 50-55,000 mt 5,000c / 10000c  |  USD/t  |  25  |  14  |  18  |  17  |  17 - 19  |  15  |  - 17  |  16  |  - 18  |  16  |  - 18  |  0  |  
Egypt - US Gulf 40-45,000 mt 6,000x / 8000c  |  USD/t  |  23  |  10  |  15  |  16  |  16 - 18  |  16  |  - 18  |  15  |  - 17  |  14  |  - 16  |  -1  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Urea Weekly Report | 3  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Urea Weekly Report | 4  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Urea Weekly Report | 5  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Urea Weekly Report | 6  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Urea Weekly Report | 7  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Urea Weekly Report | 8  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Urea Weekly Report | 9  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Urea Weekly Report | 10  |  



PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Nitrates & Sulphates  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-W  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UAN  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Black Sea 32% Spot1  |  USD/t  |  257  |  180  |  223  |  185  |  180 - 190  |  180 - 190 180 - 190 180 - 190  |  0  |  
Baltic Spot1  |  USD/t  |  253  |  195  |  214  |  200  |  195 - 205  |  195 - 205 195 - 205 195 - 205  |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.63  |  10.00  |  10.08  |  9.56  |  10.00 - 10.16  |  9.10 - 9.53 9.22 - 9.63 9.22 - 9.63  |  0  |  
US Midwest East Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.63  |  10.00  |  10.08  |  9.56  |  10.00 - 10.16  |  9.10 - 9.53 9.22 - 9.63 9.22 - 9.63  |  0  |  
US Midwest West Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.63  |  10.00  |  10.08  |  9.56  |  10.00 - 10.16  |  9.10 - 9.53 9.22 - 9.63 9.22 - 9.63  |  0  |  
US East Coast Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.30  |  7.81  |  8.70  |  7.93  |  7.81 - 7.97  |  7.81 - 7.97 7.81 - 8.12 7.81 - 8.12  |  0  |  
US Pacific NW Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.10  |  9.10  |  9.95  |  9.53  |  9.90 - 10.00 9.90 - 10.00 9.10 - 9.10 9.10 - 9.10  |  0  |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.37  |  7.81  |  9.16  |  9.15  |  9.07 - 9.22  |  9.07 - 9.22 9.07 - 9.22 9.07 - 9.22  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge 32% Spot USD/st  |  280  |  230  |  255  |  238  |  245 - 245  |  230 - 240 230 - 240 230 - 240  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/unit  |  8.75  |  7.18  |  7.96  |  7.42  |  7.66 - 7.66  |  7.18 - 7.50 7.18 - 7.50 7.18 - 7.50  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US East Coast 32% Spot1  |  USD/t  |  300  |  235  |  265  |  242  |  251 - 254  |  235 - 240  |  235 - 242  |  235 - 242  |  0  |  
Bulk DEL  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US California Spot  |  USD/unit  |  9.70  |  8.91  |  9.68  |  9.33  |  9.65 - 9.70  |  9.65 - 9.70 8.91 - 9.06 8.91 - 9.06  |  0  |  
Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Rouen 30% Spot  |  EUR/t  |  238  |  178  |  229  |  189  |  185 - 190  |  185 - 190 185 - 190 192 - 194  |  5  |  
Germany 28% Spot1  |  EUR/t  |  210  |  166  |  208  |  208  |  205 - 210  |  205 - 210  |  205 - 210  |  205 - 210  |  0  |  
AMMONIUM SULPHATE  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  290  |  265  |  273  |  283  |  275 - 290  |  275 - 290 275 - 290 275 - 290  |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  325  |  270  |  317  |  323  |  320 - 325  |  320 - 325  |  320 - 325  |  320 - 325  |  0  |  
Standard Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Black Sea - steel grade Spot  |  USD/t  |  148  |  100  |  130  |  129  |  127 - 132  |  127 - 132 125 - 130 125 - 130  |  0  |  
Black Sea - caprolactam Spot1  |  USD/t  |  155  |  115  |  153  |  153  |  150 - 155  |  150 - 155 150 - 155 150 - 155  |  0  |  
China - caprolactam Spot  |  USD/t  |  135  |  111  |  128  |  131  |  130 - 130  |  130 - 130 130 - 135 130 - 135  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
www.crugroup.com  |     |     |     |     |  Nitrates and Sulphates Weekly  |  | 1  |  



   |     |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |     |  07  |     |  14  |     |  21  |  28  |     |  W-on-W  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |     |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Standard Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Southeast Asia - caprolactam  |  USD/t  |  165  |  136  |  151  |  159  |  155 - 165  |  155 - 165  |  155 - 165  |  150 - 160  |  -5  |  
Spot  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil - caprolactam Spot  |  USD/t  |  185  |  145  |  160  |  163  |  160 - 170  |  155 - 160  |  160 - 170  |  160 - 170  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
AMMONIUM NITRATE  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Black Sea Spot1  |  USD/t  |  290  |  200  |  224  |  205  |  200 - 205  |  200 - 210 205 - 210  |  203 - 210  |  -1  |  
Baltic Sea Spot1  |  USD/t  |  290  |  200  |  225  |  206  |  200 - 205  |  200 - 210 205 - 210  |  205 - 210  |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  355  |  340  |  348  |  353  |  350 - 355  |  350 - 355 350 - 355  |  350 - 355  |  0  |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  420  |  315  |  343  |  343  |  340 - 345  |  340 - 345 340 - 345  |  340 - 345  |  0  |  
US South East Spot  |  USD/st  |  390  |  320  |  320  |  320  |  320 - 320  |  320 - 320 320 - 320  |  320 - 320  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot1  |  USD/st  |  385  |  220  |  287  |  264  |  220 - 285  |  260 - 275  |  260 - 275  |  260 - 275  |  0  |  
Bulk CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
France Spot1  |  EUR/t  |  355  |  285  |  353  |  319  |  350 - 355  |  350 - 355  |  285 - 285  |  285 - 285  |  0  |  
Bulk DEL  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US South Spot2  |  USD/st  |  440  |  0  |  333  |  333  |  330 - 335  |  330 - 335  |  330 - 335  |  330 - 335  |  0  |  
Bagged FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UK Spot  |  GBP/t  |  267  |  200  |  235  |  212  |  218 - 223  |  218 - 223 200 - 208  |  200 - 208  |  0  |  
France Spot1  |  EUR/t  |  335  |  225  |  305  |  255  |  275 - 285  |  275 - 285  |  225 - 235  |  225 - 235  |  0  |  
CAN  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk CIF  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Germany Spot  |  EUR/t  |  275  |  225  |  272  |  255  |  258 - 275  |  258 - 275 250 - 275  |  225 - 225  |  -38  |  
Benelux Spot  |  EUR/t  |  275  |  225  |  272  |  255  |  258 - 275  |  258 - 275  |  250 - 275  |  225 - 225  |  -38  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Notes: (1) Indicative Price (2) No Market  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY FREIGHTS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Nitrates & Sulphates1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |     |  07  |     |  14  |  21  |  28  |     |     |  
Commodity/Route  |     |     |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |     |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |     |  W-on-W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UAN  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Black Sea - EC US 17-27,000 mt  |     |  USD/t  |  43  |  27  |  40  |  40  |  39 - 42  |  39 - 42  |  39 - 42  |  39 - 42  |  0  |  
Black Sea - French Atlantic 17-27,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  35  |  20  |  32  |  32  |  30 - 34  |  30 - 34  |  30 - 34  |  30 - 34  |  0  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Nitrates and Sulphates Weekly | 2  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Nitrates and Sulphates Weekly | 3  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Nitrates and Sulphates Weekly | 4  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Nitrates and Sulphates Weekly | 5  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Nitrates and Sulphates Weekly | 6  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Nitrates and Sulphates Weekly | 7  |  



PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Ammonia  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |     |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |     |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY W-on-W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
AMMONIA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Black Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  625  |  380  |  403  |  389 390 - 400 385 - 395 380 - 390 380 - 390  |  0  |  
Baltic Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  615  |  390  |  413  |  398 410 - 410 395 - 400 390 - 400 390 - 390  |  -5  |  
Middle East Spot  |  USD/t  |  645  |  350  |  392  |  380 370 - 405 350 - 405 350 - 404 350 - 404  |  0  |  
Middle East (India) Contract  |  USD/t  |  580  |  380  |  421  |  396 400 - 410 380 - 405 380 - 405 380 - 405  |  0  |  
Middle East Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  645  |  350  |  409  |  381 370 - 410 350 - 405 350 - 405 350 - 405  |  0  |  
Caribbean Spot  |  USD/t  |  615  |  410  |  437  |  418 425 - 425 425 - 425 410 - 410 410 - 410  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  614  |  442  |  488  |  480 442 - 517 442 - 517 442 - 517 442 - 517  |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  670  |  540  |  617  |  615 605 - 625 605 - 625 605 - 625 605 - 625  |  0  |  
US Midwest East Spot  |  USD/st  |  670  |  560  |  622  |  623 620 - 625 620 - 625 620 - 625 620 - 625  |  0  |  
US Midwest West Spot  |  USD/st  |  670  |  540  |  615  |  615 605 - 625 605 - 625 605 - 625 605 - 625  |  0  |  
US Northern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  650  |  560  |  650  |  650 650 - 650 650 - 650 650 - 650 650 - 650  |  0  |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  610  |  500  |  600  |  600 590 - 610 590 - 610 590 - 610 590 - 610  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Southern Europe duty paid Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  700  |  440  |  472  |  456 445 - 470 445 - 470 440 - 470 440 - 470  |  0  |  
NW Europe duty paid Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  710  |  455  |  487  |  469 460 - 480 460 - 480 455 - 480 455 - 480  |  0  |  
Turkey Spot  |  USD/t  |  645  |  415  |  433  |  420 415 - 425 415 - 425 415 - 425 415 - 425  |  0  |  
Morocco Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  650  |  420  |  443  |  425 420 - 430 420 - 430 420 - 430 420 - 430  |  0  |  
India Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  640  |  410  |  436  |  431 410 - 450 410 - 450 410 - 450 415 - 450  |  3  |  
South Korea/Taiwan Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  700  |  433  |  474  |  449 449 - 470 433 - 460 433 - 460 433 - 450  |  -5  |  
Southeast Asia Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  670  |  437  |  463  |  448 455 - 455 450 - 450 450 - 450 437 - 437  |  -13  |  
US Gulf Spot  |  USD/t  |  655  |  450  |  477  |  458 465 - 465 465 - 465 450 - 450 450 - 450  |  0  |  
US Tampa Spot  |  USD/t  |  655  |  450  |  477  |  458 465 - 465 465 - 465 450 - 450 450 - 450  |  0  |  
US NOLA/Texas Spot  |  USD/t  |  655  |  450  |  477  |  458 465 - 465 465 - 465 450 - 450 450 - 450  |  0  |  
Bulk DEL  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Midwest rail Spot  |  USD/st  |  620  |  540  |  592  |  590 580 - 600 580 - 600 580 - 600 580 - 600  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
www.crugroup.com  |     |     |     |     |     |  Ammonia Weekly Report |  |  1  |  



   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |     |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-W  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |     |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US California Spot  |  USD/st  |  600  |  580  |  590  |  590 580 - 600 580 - 600 580 - 600 580 - 600  |  0  |  
Notes: (1) Indicative Price  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY FREIGHTS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
AMMONIA1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |     |  
Commodity/Route  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |     |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |     |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W-on-W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
AMMONIA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Yuzhnyy - US Tampa 38-40,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  95  |     |  65  |  83  |  87  |  81 - 91  |  81 - 91  |  81 - 91  |  85 - 95  |  4  |  
Yuzhnyy - NW Europe 22-24,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  77  |     |  60  |  74  |  73  |  72 - 77  |  72 - 77  |  72 - 77  |  70 - 75  |  -2  |  
Yuzhnyy - S Europe 13-15,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  61  |     |  50  |  58  |  58  |  56 - 61  |  56 - 61  |  56 - 61  |  55 - 60  |  0  |  
Yuzhnyy - Morocco 22-24,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  67  |     |  45  |  64  |  61  |  62 - 67  |  62 - 67  |  62 - 67  |  50 - 60  |  -9  |  
Baltic - NW Europe 13-15,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  41  |     |  28  |  38  |  38  |  36 - 41  |  36 - 41  |  36 - 41  |  36 - 41  |  0  |  
Middle East - WC India 22-24,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  55  |     |  35  |  42  |  42  |  38 - 48  |  38 - 48  |  38 - 48  |  36 - 46  |  -2  |  
Middle East - EC India 22-24,000 mt  |  USD/t  |  75  |     |  45  |  62  |  61  |  58 - 68  |  58 - 68  |  58 - 68  |  52 - 62  |  -6  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Weekly Report | 2  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Weekly Report | 3  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Weekly Report | 4  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Weekly Report | 5  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Weekly Report | 6  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Weekly Report | 7  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Weekly Report | 8  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Weekly Report | 9  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Ammonia Weekly Report | 10  |  



PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Phosphates  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |     |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY W-on-W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
DAP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Gulf/Tampa Spot  |  USD/t  |  511  |  440  |  464  |  470  |  460 - 465  |  468 - 472 474 - 474  |  474 - 474  |  0  |  
Saudi Arabia Spot1  |  USD/t  |  495  |  450  |  479  |  475  |  473 - 480  |  473 - 477 473 - 477  |  473 - 477  |  0  |  
Baltic/Black Sea Spot  |  USD/t  |  520  |  430  |  478  |  486  |  465 - 500  |  470 - 500 470 - 500  |  480 - 500  |  5  |  
North Africa Spot  |  USD/t  |  540  |  450  |  498  |  498  |  480 - 510  |  487 - 510 487 - 510  |  487 - 510  |  0  |  
Morocco Spot  |  USD/t  |  535  |  470  |  498  |  498  |  480 - 510  |  487 - 510 487 - 510  |  487 - 510  |  0  |  
Tunisia Spot2  |  USD/t  |  540  |  450  |  512  |  510  |  510 - 510  |  510 - 510 510 - 510  |  510 - 510  |  0  |  
China Spot  |  USD/t  |  480  |  415  |  466  |  466  |  460 - 470  |  460 - 470 460 - 475  |  460 - 475  |  0  |  
Mexico Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  500  |  440  |  465  |  471  |  460 - 470  |  470 - 475 470 - 475  |  470 - 475  |  0  |  
Jordan Spot  |  USD/t  |  520  |  440  |  475  |  472  |  467 - 475  |  467 - 475 467 - 475  |  467 - 480  |  3  |  
Australia Spot1  |  USD/t  |  490  |  465  |  475  |  470  |  465 - 475  |  465 - 475 465 - 475  |  465 - 475  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  455  |  396  |  412  |  418  |  408 - 415  |  412 - 425 415 - 425  |  420 - 427  |  4  |  
US Central Florida Spot  |  USD/st  |  450  |  430  |  443  |  444  |  440 - 445  |  440 - 445 445 - 445  |  445 - 445  |  0  |  
US Midwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  510  |  450  |  463  |  461  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465 460 - 460  |  460 - 460  |  0  |  
US Midwest East Spot  |  USD/st  |  500  |  450  |  463  |  461  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465 460 - 460  |  460 - 460  |  0  |  
US Midwest West Spot  |  USD/st  |  510  |  450  |  463  |  461  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465 460 - 460  |  460 - 460  |  0  |  
US Southern Plains Spot  |  USD/st  |  510  |  440  |  461  |  464  |  460 - 470  |  460 - 470 460 - 465  |  460 - 465  |  0  |  
US South Spot  |  USD/st  |  505  |  440  |  463  |  463  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465  |  460 - 465  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India Spot  |  USD/t  |  505  |  450  |  482  |  479  |  476 - 484  |  476 - 482 476 - 482  |  476 - 482  |  0  |  
Pakistan Spot  |  USD/t  |  510  |  450  |  492  |  486  |  485 - 490  |  482 - 488 482 - 488  |  482 - 488  |  0  |  
Argentina/Uruguay Spot1  |  USD/t  |  538  |  460  |  481  |  498  |  485 - 495  |  495 - 505  |  495 - 505  |  500 - 505  |  3  |  
Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
www.crugroup.com  |     |     |     |     |     |  Phosphates Weekly Report |  |  1  |  



   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |     |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY W-on-W  |  
Terneuzen/Ghent Spot1  |  USD/t  |  580  |  520  |  528  |  528  |  525 - 530  |  525 - 530  |  525 - 530  |  525 - 530  |  0  |  



US California Spot  |  USD/st  |  560  |  550  |  555  |  555  |  550  |  - 560  |  550  |  - 560  |  550  |  - 560  |  550  |  - 560  |  0  |  
US Northwest Spot  |  USD/st  |  570  |  550  |  560  |  560  |  550  |  - 570  |  550  |  - 570  |  550  |  - 570  |  550  |  - 570  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bagged CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China wholesale Spot  |  RMB/t  |  3050  |  2550  |  2925  |  2925  |  2900 - 2950 2900 - 2950 2900 - 2950 2900 - 2950  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bagged EXW  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China (excludes export sales) Spot  |  RMB/t  |  2700  |  2300  |  2575  |  2575  |  2550 - 2600 2550 - 2600 2550 - 2600 2550 - 2600  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
MAP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Gulf/Tampa Spot  |  USD/t  |  513  |  450  |  466  |  471  |  465  |  - 465  |  468  |  - 472  |  474  |  - 474  |  474  |  - 474  |  0  |  
Baltic/Black Sea Spot1  |  USD/t  |  510  |  440  |  463  |  474  |  465  |  - 475  |  470  |  - 475  |  470  |  - 475  |  480  |  - 485  |  10  |  
Morocco Spot  |  USD/t  |  535  |  475  |  498  |  500  |  482  |  - 510  |  487  |  - 515  |  487  |  - 515  |  487  |  - 515  |  0  |  
Mexico Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  500  |  445  |  465  |  471  |  460  |  - 470  |  470  |  - 475  |  470  |  - 475  |  470  |  - 475  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  475  |  0  |  414  |  428  |  425  |  - 425  |  425  |  - 435  |  420  |  - 435  |  425  |  - 437  |  3  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil Spot  |  USD/t  |  540  |  460  |  477  |  493  |  480  |  - 492  |  490  |  - 500  |  490  |  - 500  |  495  |  - 500  |  3  |  
Bagged EXW  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China 11-44-0 (excludes export sales) Spot  |  RMB/t  |  2300  |  1700  |  1950  |  1950  |  1900 - 2000 1900 - 2000 1900 - 2000 1900 - 2000  |  0  |  
China 10-50-0 (excludes export sales) Spot  |  RMB/t  |  2400  |  2000  |  2175  |  2200  |  2150 - 2250 2150 - 2250 2150 - 2250 2150 - 2250  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
TSP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Morocco Spot  |  USD/t  |  430  |  370  |  380  |  389  |  380  |  - 380  |  380  |  - 405  |  380  |  - 405  |  380  |  - 405  |  0  |  
Tunisia Spot2  |  USD/t  |  420  |  365  |  380  |  380  |  380  |  - 380  |  380  |  - 380  |  380  |  - 380  |  380  |  - 380  |  0  |  
China Spot2  |  USD/t  |  355  |  280  |  300  |  303  |  280  |  - 320  |  280  |  - 320  |  280  |  - 320  |  300  |  - 320  |  10  |  
Granular Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil Spot2  |  USD/t  |  430  |  340  |  367  |  366  |  340  |  - 385  |  340  |  - 385  |  340  |  - 385  |  350  |  - 400  |  12  |  
Granular Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Benelux Spot2  |  USD/t  |  425  |  400  |  410  |  410  |  400  |  - 420  |  400  |  - 420  |  400  |  - 420  |  400  |  - 420  |  0  |  
SSP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil inland 18-20% P2O5 Spot  |  USD/t  |  320  |  280  |  298  |  298  |  280  |  - 315  |  280  |  - 315  |  280  |  - 315  |  280  |  - 315  |  0  |  
PHOSPHORIC ACID  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
North Africa Q2 2015 100% P2O5 Contract  |  USD/t  |  840  |  625  |  778  |  778  |  715  |  - 840  |  715  |  - 840  |  715  |  - 840  |  715  |  - 840  |  0  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India H1 2015 30 days 100% P2O5 Contract  |  USD/t  |  805  |  715  |  805  |  805  |  805  |  - 805  |  805  |  - 805  |  805  |  - 805  |  805  |  - 805  |  0  |  
NW Europe Q1 2015 100% P2O5  |  USD/t  |  990  |  835  |  945  |  945  |  900  |  - 990  |  900  |  - 990  |  900  |  - 990  |  900  |  - 990  |  0  |  
Spot/Contract  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
PHOSPHATE ROCK  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Morocco Q1 2015 (68-72% BPL) Contract  |  USD/t  |  120  |  100  |  115  |  115  |  110  |  - 120  |  110  |  - 120  |  110  |  - 120  |  110  |  - 120  |  0  |  
Jordan Q1 2015 (66-72% BPL) Contract  |  USD/t  |  124  |  100  |  112  |  114  |  105  |  - 118  |  105  |  - 118  |  105  |  - 118  |  120  |  - 124  |  10  |  
Jordan Q1 2015 (73-75% BPL) Contract  |  USD/t  |  137  |  115  |  133  |  133  |  128  |  - 137  |  128  |  - 137 128 - 137  |  130  |  - 137  |  1  |  
Egypt (60-68% BPL) Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  77  |  60  |  69  |  69  |  62 - 75  |  62 - 75  |  62 - 75  |  62 - 75  |  0  |  
Peru Q1 2015 (63-68% BPL) Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  100  |  70  |  94  |  94  |  88  |  - 100  |  88  |  - 100  |  88  |  - 100  |  88  |  - 100  |  0  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
India Q1 2015 (71-75% BPL) Contract  |  USD/t  |  149  |  136  |  143  |  143  |  136  |  - 149  |  136  |  - 149  |  136  |  - 149  |  136  |  - 149  |  0  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 2  |  



   |     |     |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |     |  07  |     |     |  14  |     |  21  |     |  28  |     |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  W-on-W  |  
   |     |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |     |  MAY  |     |     |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |  
India H2 (65-70% BPL) Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  135  |  93  |  115  |  115  |  95  |  - 135  |  95  |  - 135  |  95  |  - 135  |  95  |  - 135  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
NPKS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Baltic Sea 16-16-16 Spot1  |  USD/t  |  375  |  330  |  345  |  345  |  340  |  - 350  |  340  |  - 350  |  340  |  - 350  |  340  |  - 350  |  0  |  
Baltic Sea 15-15-15 Spot1  |  USD/t  |  365  |  325  |  330  |  330  |  325  |  - 335  |  325  |  - 335  |  325  |  - 335  |  325  |  - 335  |  0  |  
Baltic/Black Sea 10-26-26 Spot1  |  USD/t  |  410  |  0  |  405  |  405  |  400  |  - 410  |  400  |  - 410  |  400  |  - 410  |  400  |  - 410  |  0  |  
Bulk CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
France 17-17-17 Spot1  |  EUR/t  |  365  |  345  |  363  |  363  |  360  |  - 365  |  360  |  - 365  |  360  |  - 365  |  360  |  - 365  |  0  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China 16-16-16 Spot1  |  USD/t  |  405  |  350  |  395  |  395  |  385  |  - 405  |  385  |  - 405  |  385  |  - 405  |  385  |  - 405  |  0  |  
Southeast Asia 16-16-16 Spot2  |  USD/t  |  420  |  360  |  405  |  407  |  395  |  - 415  |  395  |  - 415  |  395  |  - 415  |  405  |  - 420  |  8  |  
India 10-26-26 Spot  |  USD/t  |  440  |  0  |  435  |  423  |  420  |  - 425  |  420  |  - 425  |  420  |  - 425  |  420  |  - 425  |  0  |  
Bulk CIF  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Germany 15-15-15 Spot1  |  EUR/t  |  330  |  315  |  320  |  320  |  315  |  - 325  |  315  |  - 325  |  315  |  - 325  |  315  |  - 325  |  0  |  
Bagged CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UK 20-10-10 Spot  |  GBP/t  |  315  |  305  |  310  |  310  |  305  |  - 315  |  305  |  - 315  |  305  |  - 315  |  305  |  - 315  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bagged EXW  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China 15-15-15-Cl (excludes export sales)  |  RMB/t  |  2100  |  1700  |  1815  |  1825  |  1750 - 1900 1750 - 1900 1750 - 1900 1750 - 1900  |  0  |  
Spot  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China 15-15-15-S (excludes export sales)  |  RMB/t  |  2400  |  2100  |  2210  |  2200  |  2150 - 2250 2150 - 2250 2150 - 2250 2150 - 2250  |  0  |  
Spot  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Notes: (1) Indicative Price (2) No Recent Business  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY FREIGHTS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Phosphates1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |     |     |  07  |  14  |  21  |     |  28  |     |  
Commodity/Route  |     |     |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |     |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY W-on-W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
DAP-MAP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Tampa - Brazil 20-25,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  24  |  15  |     |  17  |  16  |  16 - 18 16 - 18  |  15 - 17 15 - 17  |  0  |  
Tampa - Pakistan 35-40,000 mt 8,000c / 3,500x  |  USD/t  |  64  |  31  |     |  34  |  35  |  35 - 37 34 - 36  |  34 - 36 34 - 36  |  0  |  
Tampa - WC India 50-60,000 mt 8,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  44  |  23  |     |  26  |  26  |  26 - 28 26 - 28  |  24 - 26 24 - 26  |  0  |  
Baltic - Brazil 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  31  |  15  |     |  21  |  21  |  21 - 23 22 - 24  |  20 - 22 19 - 21  |  -1  |  
Red Sea - WC India 15-25,000 mt 8,000x / 6,000x  |  USD/t  |  27  |  15  |     |  17  |  16  |  16 - 18 16 - 18  |  16 - 18 15 - 17  |  -1  |  
Tunisia - Pakistan 25-30,000 mt 6,000x / 3,500x  |  USD/t  |  43  |  26  |     |  28  |  30  |  29 - 31 29 - 31  |  29 - 31 29 - 31  |  0  |  
Tunisia - Turkey 10-15,000 mt 6,000x / 3,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  20  |  12  |     |  15  |  13  |  15 - 17 12 - 14  |  12 - 14 12 - 14  |  0  |  
Morocco - Brazil 25-30,000 mt 7,500x / 5,000c  |     |  USD/t  |  20  |  11  |     |  13  |  12  |  12 - 14 11 - 13  |  12 - 14 12 - 14  |  0  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 3  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 4  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 5  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 6  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 7  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 8  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 9  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 10  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 11  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 12  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 13  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Phosphates Weekly Report | 14  |  



PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Potash  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  52 WK 52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |     |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY W-on-W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
POTASH  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Standard Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vancouver Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  330  |  281  |  307  |  307  |  293 - 320  |  293 - 320 293 - 320  |  293 - 320  |  0  |  
Jordan/Israel Spot/Contract1  |  USD/t  |  333  |  271  |  300  |  300  |  290 - 310  |  290 - 310 290 - 310  |  290 - 310  |  0  |  
Baltic Sea Spot/Contract  |  USD/t  |  333  |  266  |  289  |  289  |  278 - 300  |  278 - 300  |  278 - 300  |  278 - 300  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Standard Bulk CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China/Russia cross border  |  USD/t  |  305  |  300  |  303  |  303  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305  |  300 - 305  |  0  |  
Spot/Contract1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Standard Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China Contract  |  USD/t  |  315  |  305  |  315  |  315  |  315 - 315  |  315 - 315 315 - 315  |  315 - 315  |  0  |  
India 180 days Contract  |  USD/t  |  332  |  322  |  322  |  332  |  332 - 332  |  332 - 332 332 - 332  |  332 - 332  |  0  |  
Southeast Asia Spot  |  USD/t  |  350  |  290  |  330  |  331  |  315 - 345  |  315 - 345  |  315 - 350  |  310 - 350  |  -3  |  
Standard Bagged FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China port wholesale Spot  |  RMB/t  |  2200  |  1930  |  2098  |  2070  |  2000 - 2150 2000 - 2150 2000 - 2130 2000 - 2130  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vancouver Spot1  |  USD/t  |  345  |  290  |  315  |  315  |  300 - 330  |  300 - 330 300 - 330  |  300 - 330  |  0  |  
Baltic Sea Spot1  |  USD/t  |  353  |  256  |  310  |  310  |  290 - 329  |  290 - 329 290 - 329  |  290 - 329  |  0  |  
US Carlsbad Spot1  |  USD/st  |  410  |  350  |  397  |  389  |  380 - 398  |  380 - 398 380 - 398  |  380 - 398  |  0  |  
Saskatchewan Spot  |  USD/st  |  375  |  355  |  375  |  375  |  375 - 375  |  375 - 375 375 - 375  |  375 - 375  |  0  |  
US New Orleans barge Spot  |  USD/st  |  375  |  325  |  345  |  333  |  340 - 345  |  325 - 340 325 - 340  |  325 - 325  |  -8  |  
US Midwest East Spot  |  USD/st  |  415  |  380  |  395  |  393  |  390 - 400  |  390 - 400 390 - 390  |  390 - 390  |  0  |  
US Midwest West Spot  |  USD/st  |  415  |  375  |  394  |  391  |  390 - 400  |  390 - 400 385 - 390  |  385 - 390  |  0  |  
US South Spot  |  USD/st  |  410  |  370  |  393  |  384  |  380 - 390  |  380 - 390  |  380 - 390  |  380 - 380  |  -5  |  
Granular Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Brazil Spot  |  USD/t  |  380  |  325  |  335  |  334  |  325 - 340 330 - 340  |  330 - 340  |  330 - 340  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
www.crugroup.com  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Potash Weekly Report |  |  1  |  



   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |     |  07  |  14  |     |  21  |     |  28  |  W-on-W  |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |     |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |     |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |  MAY  |     |  MAY  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Granular Bulk CIF  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
NW Europe Spot/Contract1  |  EUR/t  |     |  315  |     |  250  |  305  |  309  |  300 - 310  |  305 - 315  |  305 - 315  |  305 - 315  |     |  0  |  
Granular Bulk DEL  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Midwest barge Spot  |  USD/st  |     |  380  |     |  0  |  363  |  363  |  360 - 365  |  360 - 365  |  360 - 365  |  360 - 365  |     |  0  |  
SOP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Standard Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
NW Europe Spot/Contract1  |  EUR/t  |     |  500  |     |  410  |  460  |  465  |  450 - 470  |  450 - 470  |  450 - 470  |  460 - 500  |     |  20  |  
Notes: (1) Indicative Price  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY FREIGHTS  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Potash1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  52 WK 52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |     |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Route  |     |     |     |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |     |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
MOP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vancouver - India 45-50,000 mt 10,000c / 5,000x  |     |  USD/t  |     |  38  |  24  |  27  |  28  |  26 - 28  |  27 - 29 27 - 29 28 - 30  |  1  |  
Vancouver - China 50-60,000 mt 12,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |     |  25  |  11  |  15  |  15  |  15 - 17  |  14 - 16 14 - 16 15 - 17  |  1  |  
Vancouver - SE Asia 30-40,000 mt 12,000c / 10,000c USD/t  |     |  34  |  18  |  20  |  21  |  20 - 22  |  20 - 22 20 - 22 20 - 22  |  0  |  
Vancouver - Brazil 40-50,000 mt 12,000c / 10,000c  |     |  USD/t  |     |  37  |  19  |  21  |  23  |  21 - 23  |  23 - 25 23 - 25 23 - 25  |  0  |  
Baltic - WC India 35-45,000 mt 8,000c / 10,000c  |     |  USD/t  |     |  45  |  27  |  31  |  33  |  32 - 34  |  33 - 35 33 - 35 31 - 33  |  -2  |  
Baltic - China 50-60,000 mt 8,000c / 6,000c  |     |  USD/t  |     |  41  |  22  |  26  |  28  |  28 - 30  |  28 - 30 26 - 28 26 - 28  |  0  |  
Baltic - SE Asia 30-35,000 mt 8,000c / 3,000x  |     |  USD/t  |     |  57  |  33  |  36  |  38  |  37 - 39  |  39 - 41 38 - 40 37 - 39  |  -1  |  
Baltic - Brazil 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000c  |     |  USD/t  |     |  31  |  15  |  21  |  21  |  21 - 23  |  22 - 24 20 - 22 19 - 21  |  -1  |  
Red Sea - China 50-55,000 mt 8,000x / 5,000x  |     |  USD/t  |     |  27  |  12  |  13  |  13  |  12 - 14  |  13 - 15 13 - 15 13 - 15  |  0  |  
Red Sea - WC India 15-25,000 mt 8,000x / 6,000x  |     |  USD/t  |     |  27  |  15  |  17  |  16  |  16 - 18  |  16 - 18 16 - 18 15 - 17  |  -1  |  
Red Sea - SE Asia 25-30,000 mt 8,000x / 1,500x  |     |  USD/t  |     |  45  |  25  |  27  |  26  |  27 - 29  |  25 - 27 25 - 27 25 - 27  |  0  |  
Ashdod - Brazil 30-35,000 mt 6,000x / 5,000c  |     |  USD/t  |     |  26  |  13  |  14  |  16  |  15 - 17  |  15 - 17  |  15 - 17  |  15 - 17  |  0  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 2  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 3  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 4  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 5  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 6  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 7  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 8  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 9  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 10  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 11  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 12  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Potash Weekly Report | 13  |  



PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Sulphur  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |     |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY W-on-W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
SULPHUR1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vancouver Spot2  |  USD/t  |  175  |  125  |  149  |  130  |  125 - 135  |  125 - 135  |  125 - 135 125 - 135  |  0  |  
Vancouver Q1 2015 Contract2  |  USD/t  |  160  |  135  |  155  |  155  |  150 - 160  |  150 - 160  |  150 - 160 150 - 160  |  0  |  
Middle East Spot2  |  USD/t  |  187  |  119  |  149  |  140  |  139 - 140  |  139 - 140  |  139 - 140 140 - 145  |  3  |  
Middle East Q2 2015 Contract  |  USD/t  |  178  |  140  |  164  |  154  |  150 - 178  |  142 - 158  |  142 - 158 142 - 158  |  0  |  
Adnoc Monthly May 2015 Contract  |  USD/t  |  180  |  135  |  140  |  140  |  140 - 140  |  140 - 140  |  140 - 140 140 - 140  |  0  |  
Tasweeq QSP Monthly May 2015 Contract  |  USD/t  |  182  |  119  |  144  |  140  |  139 - 139  |  139 - 139  |  139 - 139 141 - 141  |  2  |  
Black Sea Spot/Contract2  |  USD/t  |  140  |  110  |  135  |  128  |  130 - 140  |  120 - 130  |  120 - 130  |  120 - 130  |  0  |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China (crushed lump & gran) Spot2  |  USD/t  |  192  |  125  |  146  |  149  |  130 - 160  |  140 - 160  |  140 - 160 140 - 160  |  0  |  
India ex Middle East Spot2  |  USD/t  |  200  |  143  |  165  |  165  |  160 - 170  |  160 - 170  |  160 - 170 160 - 170  |  0  |  
North Africa Q1 2015 Contract  |  USD/t  |  165  |  160  |  163  |  163  |  160 - 165  |  160 - 165  |  160 - 165 160 - 165  |  0  |  
Mediterranean (excl. domestic contracts)  |  USD/t  |  155  |  125  |  136  |  133  |  130 - 135  |  130 - 135  |  130 - 135  |  130 - 135  |  0  |  
Spot2  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Mediterranean (incl. North Africa) Spot3  |  USD/t  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0  |  
Brazil Spot2  |  USD/t  |  200  |  140  |  163  |  155  |  150 - 160  |  150 - 160  |  150 - 160  |  150 - 160  |  0  |  
Bulk EXW  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China Spot  |  RMB/t  |  1390  |  1000  |  1080  |  1093  |  1000 - 1100 1050 - 1150 1050 - 1170 1050 - 1170  |  0  |  
Bulk FCA  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
China port Spot  |  RMB/t  |  1380  |  1000  |  1180  |  1150  |  1120 - 1180 1120 - 1180 1120 - 1180 1120 - 1180  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Liquid Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
US Tampa Q2 2015 Contract  |  USD/lt  |  147  |  129  |  138  |  132  |  132 - 132  |  132 - 132  |  132 - 132  |  132 - 132  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Liquid Bulk CPT  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
www.crugroup.com  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Sulphur Weekly |  |  1  |  



   |     |  52  |  52  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  WK  |  WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |     |  28  |     |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  W-on-W  |  
HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  
NW Europe Q2 2015 - truckload Contract  |  USD/t  |  200  |  170  |  185  |  185  |  170 - 200  |  170 - 200  |  170 - 200  |  170 - 200  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Liquid Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Benelux Q2 2015 - barge/railcar Contract  |  USD/t  |  170  |  158  |  164  |  164  |  158 - 170  |  158 - 170  |  158 - 170  |  158 - 170  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |  W-on-  |  
Commodity/Route  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
SULPHUR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Vancouver - China 50-60,000 mt 12,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  25  |  11  |  15  |  15  |  15 - 17 14 - 16 14 - 16 15 - 17  |  1  |  
Vancouver - Brazil 40-50,000 mt 12,000c / 10,000c  |  USD/t  |  37  |  19  |  21  |  23  |  21 - 23 23 - 25 23 - 25 23 - 25  |  0  |  
Middle East - WC India 15-25,000 mt 8,000x / 6,000x  |  USD/t  |  21  |  11  |  12  |  12  |  12 - 14 11 - 13 11 - 13 11 - 13  |  0  |  
Middle East - China 30-35,000 mt 8,000x / 6,000x  |  USD/t  |  26  |  14  |  15  |  16  |  15 - 17 15 - 17 15 - 17 15 - 17  |  0  |  
Middle East - Morocco 35-40,000 mt 10,000c / 5,000x  |  USD/t  |  32  |  21  |  22  |  23  |  22 - 24  |  22 - 24  |  22 - 24  |  22 - 24  |  0  |  
Black Sea - Morocco 25-30,000 mt 8,000c / 5,000x  |  USD/t  |  20  |  12  |  13  |  13  |  12 - 14  |  12 - 14  |  12 - 14  |  12 - 14  |  0  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphur Weekly | 2  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphur Weekly | 3  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphur Weekly | 4  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphur Weekly | 5  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphur Weekly | 6  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphur Weekly | 7  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphur Weekly | 8  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphur Weekly | 9  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphur Weekly | 10  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphur Weekly | 11  |  



PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
WEEKLY PRICES  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Sulphuric Acid  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  52 WK  |  52 WK  |  APR  |  MAY  |  07  |  14  |  21  |  28  |     |  
Commodity/Type  |  Unit  |  HIGH  |  LOW  |  2015  |  2015  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  MAY  |  W-on-W  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
SULPHURIC ACID  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk FOB  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
NW Europe 30 days Spot1  |  USD/t  |  35  |  10  |  31  |  31  |  27 - 35  |  27 - 35  |  27 - 35  |  27 - 35  |  0  |  
Japan/South Korea  |  USD/t  |  25  |  10  |  20  |  20  |  17 - 22  |  17 - 22  |  17 - 22  |  17 - 25  |  1  |  
Spot/Contract1  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Bulk CFR  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Chile Spot1  |  USD/t  |  90  |  60  |  85  |  85  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  0  |  
Chile Contract  |  USD/t  |  85  |  60  |  80  |  80  |  75 - 85  |  75 - 85  |  75 - 85  |  75 - 85  |  0  |  
NW Europe Q2 2015 Contract  |  EUR/t  |  80  |  55  |  69  |  69  |  57 - 80  |  57 - 80  |  57 - 80  |  57 - 80  |  0  |  
Turkey Spot1  |  USD/t  |  50  |  25  |  45  |  45  |  40 - 50  |  40 - 50  |  40 - 50  |  40 - 50  |  0  |  
Tunisia Contract  |  USD/t  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0 - 0  |  0  |  
US Gulf Spot  |  USD/t  |  85  |  45  |  75  |  75  |  70 - 80  |  70 - 80  |  70 - 80  |  70 - 80  |  0  |  
Brazil Spot  |  USD/t  |  95  |  48  |  85  |  85  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  80 - 90  |  0  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Notes: (1) Indicative Price  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphuric Acid Weekly | 1  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphuric Acid Weekly | 2  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphuric Acid Weekly | 3  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphuric Acid Weekly | 4  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphuric Acid Weekly | 5  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphuric Acid Weekly | 6  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphuric Acid Weekly | 7  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphuric Acid Weekly | 8  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphuric Acid Weekly | 9  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Sulphuric Acid Weekly | 10  |  



