The Market | 4 February 2016 | Published by ICIS | www.icis.com/fertilizers | 23 pages
The Market

Fertilizers at a glance
Nitrogen
■Urea market sees a limited uptick
The urea market has seen a limited uptick this week on higher prices in the US, the Chinese going on holidays and traders looking to cover short positions.
■Nigerian plant to start up in March Indorama Eleme Fertilizer & Chemicals Ltd (IEFCL) will start commercial production at its 1.4m-tonne/year urea plant in March.
■PIC sells cargo at $200/tonne FOB PIC/GPIC sold 25,000-30,000 tonnes of granular urea in the low-$200s/tonne FOB to Europe for end February/early March shipment, to Helm.
■Nola urea barge prices move up Nola urea barge prices moved up this week as CF entered the market and in anticipation of spring demand getting underway.
high-margin markets on weak DAP/MAP demand globally.
Ammonia
■Black Sea quiet on pricing stand-off No new business has been heard in Yuzhny as producers are targeting $270/ tonne FOB for future spot loading, but buyers are eyeing $250/tonne FOB and below.
■India’s FACT hopes for third time lucky After scrapping its two previous tenders, the group has issued a third enquiry as
it seeks 15,000 tonnes for February and March arrival.
■Namhae buys spot cargo at $347/ tonne CFR
The Korean group agreed a deal with Yara for 15,000 tonnes and reached an agreement with Koch for a 10,000-tonne cargo at an undisclosed price.
Sulphur
■Tasweeq, ADNOC announce lower February prices
Tasweeq has decreased its Qatar Sulphur Price (QSP) for February by $30/tonne to $89/tonne FOB Ras Laffan, while ADNOC announced its OSP for February shipments at $105/tonne FOB Ruwais.
■North American export prices slide Falling spot prices internationally have pushed export prices from Vancouver and the USG to below $100/tonne FOB – little demand expected during 1H February.
Potash
■Brazilian CFR prices fall on soft demand
Buyers are targeting as low as $240/tonne CFR for next business and sentiment in other parts of the world remains bearish, although no fresh activity has been seen.
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market
PRICES ARE IN US$ EXCEPT WHERE SPECIFIED
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market
Summary of recent spot sales
Weekly Freight Rate Indications
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market
Nitrogen
OVERVIEW
The global urea market has seen an uptick, or at least stabilisation, in prices in some regions during the week on the back of more activity and higher prices in the US, China disappearing from the market for the Lunar New Year holidays as well as traders needing to cover short positions, which has put producers in a more comfortable position.
Business has been concluded from the Arabian Gulf at $200/tonne FOB, while Chinese producers raised offers back to the same level on a pick up in domestic prices and realising that lower offers would not stimulate market activity at present. Offer levels into Brazil have also moved higher. Nola price levels have also moved back up above $200/ short ton FOB.
There is the view that this move was inevitable as prices had moved down too quickly, but the move has happened earlier than people expected.
However, with the urea market still fundamentally oversupplied and no real demand prospects on the horizon to support any sustained recovery in the market, sentiment remains weak overall.
Producers may be more comfortable now for February, but there is still availability and March is still open from all origins.
Higher prices in the US domestic market will likely make it more attractive as an import market, but this has yet to start and end user buying for spring has not yet got underway. There are expectations that European spring demand should kick in soon. But demand from Brazil remains slow and India is not expected to return to the market until late March at the earliest.
black sea
In Yuzhny, business has been heard for February shipment in the low/ mid-$190s/tonne FOB this week, with several traders buying at these levels. The price is assessed at $190-195/tonne FOB this week as a result.
Offers were heard at $200/tonne FOB during the week and there was talk that Dnipro had sold some tonnes at this level, but this could not be confirmed.
Buyer price targets in Turkey and Europe are understood to reflect lower netbacks, but no new business has been confirmed this week and would not likely be supported by suppliers at present.
NF Trading has no spot availability in February and has no plans to move cargoes to Turkey or Italy this month, but instead will supply the domestic market.
In the paper market, February and March bids and offers are at $190- 195/tonne FOB.
baltic
Short positions have been covered out of the Baltic this week, with sales heard in the low-$180s/tonne FOB up to $190/tonne FOB. SBU has been linked to some of the business to traders.
There was talk of a producer offer now at $180/tonne FOB.
Early in the week, bids were indicated at $160/tonne FOB but these have now moved higher. There was talk of a sale of Baltic prilled urea
to Turkey reflecting a netback in the mid-$160s/tonne FOB, but this has not been confirmed and so not included in the price range.
PhosAgro says it is fully sold out for February and is in discussions for March business, with enquiries for open destination on an FOB basis.
Uralchem, Grodno and SBU are understood to still have tonnes available for February shipment. Baltic urea is expected to feature in the Mexican tender closing on 4 February.
PhosAgro produced 978,100 tonnes of urea in 2015, up 1.3% from the 966,000 tonnes produced in 2014, according to the company’s operating results for 2015. Urea sales totalled 949,400 tonnes in the same period, down 6.6% from 2014.
europe
In Turkey, no new business has been heard this week, with buyers understood to be in no hurry to make fresh purchases.
Last done business was heard in the low/mid-$190s/tonne CFR with buyers expected to look for lower numbers in next deals. However, there was talk this week of offers rising to $210-215/tonne CFR.
In Germany, granular urea is widely being offered at €230/tonne FCA, but with no purchases concluded and buyers understood to be able to wait longer before stepping in.
In France, granular urea prices are indicated in the low/mid-€220s/ tonne FCA.
Price levels for granular urea into Italy and Spain are heard at $240/ tonne CFR.
In the UK, prices are heard at £210/tonne delivered to far for spot February/March, but levels are below £200/tonne delivered for application in 2017.
Demand is slow, with some business taking place.
africa
The mood was bearish at the Arab Fertilizer Association (AFA) conference in Cairo this week as the market remains oversupplied with urea and demand is limited.
Several deals were heard during the week in the range of $215-222/ tonne FOB Egypt. Business was heard at $215/tonne FOB for a total of 25,000 tonnes of granular urea to two traders for Europe. While one trader purchased 20,000 tonnes in two lots another bought 4,000-5,000 tonnes at $215/tonne FOB. OCI/EFC was linked to the deals but the producer has denied any sales at this level.
OCI/EFC sold $222/tonne FOB into Europe for prompt shipment this week. The producer has committed 40% of its production to the local market which is giving a significantly higher netback.
There is talk of a sale at $224/tonne this week but it could not be confirmed so has not been included in our price range.
Granular urea prices out of Egypt are assessed at $215-222/tonne FOB this week to include all business heard.
Sales are at a discount to last done business when MOPCO sold up to 40,000 tonnes of granular urea at $224/tonne FOB for shipment in
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

Earlier last week, Alexfert sold 5,000 tonnes to Trammo on 27 January for prompt shipment to Italy.
Direct Hedge Fertilizer Swaps Price Indications, 4 february 2016
Production was affected this week with Helwan and Alexfert both down for three days each due to lack of gas supply. Both plants resumed production on 2 February.
Production at MOPCO’s plant is expected to remain down for two to three weeks as a gas pipeline is being repaired. Production went down on 25 January following an explosion at the plant’s gas pipe line.
MOPCO has no spot tonnes available as a result, while Helwan is expected to have 30,000-35,000 tonnes for February and Alexfert about 5,000 tonnes. However, availability may be lower if either of these producers have sold into Europe this week.
In Algeria, granular urea prices are assessed in the $220-225/tonne FOB range based on Egyptian prices.
AOA Edeola/Bahwan is producing from one of its two 95,000-tonne/ month lines, while the other line is working intermittently. Sorfert is operating its urea line while its ammonia line came back on stream last week.
In Libya, Lifeco was last heard to be running one ammonia and one urea line.
In Nigeria, Indorama Eleme Fertilizer & Chemicals Ltd (IEFCL) will start commercial production at its 1.4m-tonne/year urea plant in March. The project consists of a 2,300-tonne/day ammonia plant, 4,000-tonne/day urea plant, an 83 km long gas pipeline and an export port terminal. Ammonia from the plant will be used for urea production.
Gas supply to the urea and ammonia lines will resume later this month, ammonia and urea production is expected in March while exports from the plant will begin in April.
Urea from the plant will be sold into the domestic market and also exported to Europe, Latin America and India among other markets.
One third of the total urea production will go to the domestic market, while traders Trammo and Helm will sell the rest. Trammo and Helm have a 50:50 contract to sell urea from the plant to international markets.
Helm will sell product for another Nigerian urea plant, the 1.4m-tonne/ year Brass Island facility, which is expected to start production in 2018.
The IEFCL plant is starting production when the market is already over supplied with urea, and could add further pressure on prices. Moreover, the plant’s cost of production is heard to be as low as some Arab Gulf countries, at below $100/tonne.
Construction of the IEFCL urea plant, near Port Harcourt in Rivers State, commenced in early 2013 with commissioning initially expected in late 2015. The complex already has olefins, polyethylene, butene and polypropylene plants.
Direct Hedge Fertilizer Swaps Price Indications, 4 february 2016
middle East
In the Arab Gulf, granular urea prices have edged up slightly this week as there are signs of a slight pickup in prices in the US and Brazil. A granular urea sale was concluded at $200/tonne FOB or slightly higher this week as Helm covered a short position.
Offers in Brazil have also gone up, with recent business there reflecting mid-$180ss/tonne FOB.
Granular urea prices are assessed at $185-200/tonne FOB this week. Prilled prices are also evaluated in line with granular urea.
In Kuwait/Bahrain, PIC/GPIC sold 25,000-30,000 tonnes of granular urea in the low-$200s/tonne FOB to Europe for end February/early March shipment, to Helm. The trader was understood to be covering an old sale.
PIC’s 35,000-tonne cargo to IPL India is heard to have been rejected by the Department of Fertilizers as it loaded two to three days after the shipment deadline.
In February, the producer is shipping a cargo for Dreymoor to the US, one cargo for Ameropa in end February and another one for TCCC Thailand.
The producer now has no spot availability until end-March.
In other major news, PIC is considering closing down its fertilizer operation units in Shuaiba by second half 2017 due to expansion in its olefins and aromatics businesses. PIC has a capacity to produce around 1.1m tonnes/year of urea at Shuaiba and over 650,000 tonnes/year of ammonia.
Operations of GPIC in Bahrain, which produces around 650,000 tonnes/year of urea, are not expected to be affected by this move.
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

In Oman, SIUCI is expected to have spot availability for February shipment while Muntajat in Qatar has no availability in February.
FERTIL UAE says it has no spot availability until May given contract commitments. The producer is undergoing a short, two to three day, maintenance this week at FERTIL-2 to change a compressor.
In Iran, last done business into Turkey was heard reflecting $180/ tonne FOB. Availability is limited due to domestic requirements and as Pardis has a turnaround. DT
asia
In India, the Department of Fertilizers (DoF) is understood to have rejected a number of cargoes under the last IPL and STC tenders and traders have been issued with penalties. A cargo from PIC was rejected as it was two days late loading, while other cargoes were also late, or rejected for arriving with a mixed cargo or wrong particle size. It is not clear what the total volume of rejected cargoes amounts to at present.
Zuari has announced a scheduled shutdown of its ammonia and urea plants at Goa for annual maintenance. The units were taken offline on 26 January and while a restart date has not been disclosed, such maintenance usually lasts 21-28 days. The west coast plants produce up to 1,140 tonnes/day of urea and 660 tonnes/day of ammonia.
In Korea, Pungnong closed a purchase tender for 5,000 tonnes of granular urea on 28 January and is understood to have made an award to Dreymoor at $197/tonne CFR.
A Korean trader is heard to have sold 6,000 tonnes of granular urea to Dongbu reflecting below $185/tonne FOB China for March shipment.
In Vietnam, Daewoo is heard to have sold 6,000-12,000 tonnes of prilled urea in containers at $209/tonne CFR for 2H February/1H March shipment.
In Taiwan, TFC will look at whether to buy spot urea once the Lunar New Year holidays are over.
In Malaysia, NAFAS closed a tender on 28 January for 6,000 tonnes of prilled urea and is understood to have made an award to Golden Barley at $199/tonne CFR for end February/early March shipment.
In Indonesia, Kaltim is understood to not be selling for export in February as price levels are not attractive. The producer is heard to have a minimum support price of $235-240/tonne FOB which is well above the current market.
The domestic market is heard to be giving the $260s/tonne FOB equivalent.
In Thailand, Liven is understood to have sold 20,000-25,000 tonnes of granular urea to Sak Siam at $197/tonne CFR. The cargo is expected to be shipped from PIC/Kuwait.
In China, activity has been limited due to the imminent start of the Lunar New Year holidays. Although offer levels from producers moved up to $200/tonne FOB for prilled and granular urea, partly as a response to improved domestic levels.
Both prilled and granular urea assessments are at $190-200/tonne FOB this week.
Netbacks from latest business into SE Asia and Korea reflected netbacks in the low/mid-$180s/tonne FOB for second half February/ March shipments. These sales are all understood to be short positions for now, with these price levels not supported by suppliers, and so are not included in the price range this week.
There were some increases in domestic prices this week, although this was limited to certain regions. Some attributed this to the upcoming spring demand season, but others noted that in Shandong province there has been some production cutbacks/maintenance brought forward. In general operating rates remained at 68-70% of capacity.
Port inventory levels remain above 1m tonnes and this is expected to increase over the coming weeks despite the holiday period.
In the domestic market, production rates were still heard at around 68-70% of capacity this week. Trading sentiment in some parts of China improved in the week and prices saw some uptick, with latest prices heard as follows:
•CNY1,200-1,370/tonne EXW and CNY1,270-1,480/tonne EXWH in northern provinces
•CNY1,280-1,500/tonne EXW and CNY1,380-1,550/tonne EXWH in southern provinces
•CNY1,308/tonne EXW from the Luxi factory, Shandong
americas
In the US, Nola barge prices saw an uptick as CF entered the market and in anticipation of spring demand getting underway.
Sources noted that end users have not yet returned to the market. There is the view that farmers and retailers will try to delay purchasing as long as they can because there seems to be a well-established viewpoint that if they can wait price levels will drop some more.
There is talk that the system is relatively empty still and that product needs to start moving soon to get in place in case there is an early spring.
Prompt/February barges were heard traded in the $187-208/short ton FOB Nola range this week, with March trading up to $210/short ton. The price is assessed at $187-210/short ton FOB.
In the paper market, February bids and offers are at $202-205/short ton FOB, with March at $204-206/short ton FOB.
The higher price levels are likely to make the US an even more attractive import market.
A cargo of Baltic granular urea is heard sold to Canada at $215/ tonne CFR.
In Mexico, the buying pool closed a tender on 4 February for 25,000 tonnes of prilled urea for February shipment to the east coast.
No offers have been heard yet, although there was talk earlier in the week of offers to the east coast at around $210/tonne CFR.
In Brazil, no fresh sales have been seen week. Firm buyer interest was
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

The market is expected to quieten down further over the coming week for the Carnival celebrations.
There is some talk that Petrobras may reissue its sales tender for 25,000-40,000 tonnes of prilled urea which failed to attract any bids last time.
Delays at Paranagau Port are currently less than 10 days, due to a combination of weak seasonal demand and macroeconomic problems.
Mekatrade loaded a 30,000-tonne vessel in Venezuela last week for shipment to Brazil. Two or three cargoes are expected to be available for shipment from Venezuela this month.
Cuts in capro production, particularly in China in the lead up to the Lunar New Year holiday, have prevented AS prices from eroding compared to the wider nitrates sector.
In the Black Sea, steel producer NLMK is understood to have rejected a bid at $83/tonne CPT Kherson, which brings it to $93/tonne FOB. Around 3,000-4,000 tonnes of AS is available. The material is expected to be sold domestically.
Mechel also has 1,500 tonnes of steel grade AS available for export in February. It most recent sales was $95/tonne CPT Novorossiysk.
Steel producer MMK was heard to have sold 500 tonnes of AS, possibly to Latvia.
Capro grade prices in the Black Sea continue to be talked in the low/ mid-$130s/tonne FOB.
Ammonium nitrate
The AN market is lacking any momentum as buyers continue to shun the market. Offers were heard at $185/tonne FOB for Baltic tonnes, while buying interest is still lacking.
Prices remain in the range of $180-185/tonne FOB in Baltic and Black Sea in the absence of any fresh business.
Global demand for AN is lacking but producers have found some respite from local demand in Russia and Ukraine.
In Turkey, there is no interest from buyers for AN. Also, there are no offers heard as Russian producers have diverted their attention to local demand in Russia and Ukraine.
In Germany, CAN prices remain in the €222-230/tonne CIF range for now. Buying interest is thin as warehouses are full.
In Ghent, last heard CAN offers were at €180/tonne FOB but no deals have been concluded.
In Geleen, OCI expects to restart its CAN production in 2H February. CAN production at the plant has been down since 30 September 2015 following a fire.
In France, AN prices are unchanged with several distributors holding significant stocks in the €300-308/tonne delivered range.
In the UK, the market remains slow. Prices remain at £190-200/tonne FCA equivalent this week with the high end of the range reflecting CF prices and the low end based on import levels.
In Tunisia, 40,000 tonnes of AN was delivered to GCT from Ameropa/ EuroChem under its import tender that closed in October 2015. Another 20,000 tonnes will arrive at the end of February.
In the US, AN barges are assessed in the $195-200/short ton FOB Nola range this week.
In China, AS spot prices are again heard below $100/tonne FOB, but it is not clear if business has actually been agreed at this level. Sources say sellers are doing their utmost to keep prices levels above the psychological $100/tonne FOB mark.
Capro grade spot prices this week are in a $103-108/tonne FOB China price range. There was mention of bids at $100/tonne FOB and offers at $110/tonne FOB, but sources said the high end was no longer representative and there were no sellers willing to do business at $100/tonne FOB.
No firm deals have been mentioned among market followers.
In southeast Asia, no spot requirements were heard in the market. The range has moved down in line with the minor reduction seen in China this week.
For steel grade, offers to Vietnam have been heard at $102-105/tonne CFR.
For Asian capro, prices remained stable in a quiet market and Chinese players closed off their positions in preparation of their long holidays. Taiwan was also quiet.
Spot capro prices fell by an average of $105/tonne CFR NE Asia in January averaging at $1,148.75/tonne CFR. Asia spot benzene prices averaged at $548.15/tonne FOB Korea in January. The capro spread against benzene on spot prices for January was at $600.60/tonne against the typical required spread of around $800/tonne.
In the European capro market, the contract price for January has been agreed €15-20/tonne lower from December, as a result of the feedstock benzene January decrease.
Despite some hesitation due to falling crude oil prices, January demand was seen as normal and February is expected to be much the same in terms of volumes. Some sources said that January could have been significantly stronger demand-wise as it is considered one of the industry’s peak months.
Ammonium sulphate
The AS market was quiet again this week, with prices easing in China and subsequently Southeast Asia, largely on sentiment rather than actual physical trades.
A producer said that falling stock markets, lower crude oil prices and the volatility of the Chinese economy have spread uncertainty among players, therefore customers will only place regular volumes and any additional spot deals will be limited.
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

In Brazil, prices are steady since capro grade AS in Europe and China has remained relatively stable, albeit a bit softer in China.
Offers from China are at $130/tonne CFR for lower grade material.
In Turkey, no buying interest was seen. Because of this, a trader said it was impossible to suggest even a notional price range for the Turkish market
UAN Solutions
UAN prices continue to be depressed, tracking the rout in prices of other nitrogen products. The only major deal this week was Bunge’s purchase of 25,000 tonnes of UAN from Nitron at $170/tonne CFR.
In the Black Sea, netbacks from business into Europe and Argentina reflect $125-130/tonne FOB and this forms the basis of our range.
No Black Sea FOB business is heard, although there is talk EuroChem is shipping a cargo to Ghent/Rouen in February.
In France, UAN prices this week are heard in the €155-160/tonne FCA range, €5/tonne lower compared to the previous week.
For the new campaign (June-December), prices are heard in the €150- 155/tonne FCA range. This is a €10/tonne reduction from prices heard about two weeks ago.
In Belarus, Grodno is understood to be selling in the domestic market as prices are better.
In Egypt, Abu Qir will close a sales tender for 25,000 tonnes of UAN on 8 February, for shipment 11-15 February.
Under its last tender, the producer sold 5,000 tonnes to Trammo at $140/tonne FOB.
The producer may soon lower UAN production if prices do not improve as UAN prices are nearing their cost of production.
In Argentina, Nitron is understood to have sold 25,.000 tonnes of
UAN fixtures and enquiries in JANUARY/February
UAN to Bunge at $170/tonne CFR. The cargo is from CF Industries and is likely to be a combination vessel.
In the US, barge offers are heard in the range of $160-165/short ton FOB Nola this week. Bids are believed to be around $150/short ton FOB Nola. This week’s range is assessed at $150-160/short ton FOB Nola. Inland and upriver terminals also offer netbacks in the $150- 155/short ton FOB Nola range.
On the east coast, UAN prices are assessed in the range of $160-165/ tonne CFR based on bids and offers. Northern terminal values are around $170/short ton FOB for prompt with only a slight premium for Q2 prepay.
CF Industries and CHS have started a nitrogen fertilizer strategic venture and have begun delivery of urea and UAN. Under the agreement, CHS is entitled to 1.1m tons (997,920 tonnes) of granular urea and 580,000 tons (526,176 tonnes) of UAN annually. (See also News)
Follow Deepika Thapliyal on Twitter @IcisFertDeepika for daily tweets on the latest nitrates information and Julia Meehan @ ICISJulia for the latest on amsul.
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market
Phosphates
OVERVIEW
The phosphates market was dominated this week by news that Mosaic will reduce production in its phosphate business. The producer will implement a plan of rotating plant shutdowns in Q1 which will drop production by 400,000 tonnes.
Market participants are optimistic that cutting production will stop the freefall in prices because of global oversupply.
The announcement had a psychological effect on the market, with Nola DAP barge prices edging downwards. It remains to be seen whether it will be sustainable especially as market participants will gather at the TFI conference in Orlando next week. It is not clear whether other producers are thought to follow suit.
In Asia, the market is subdued ahead of the Lunar New Year next week. DAP prices are under pressure, as producers will start focusing on the domestic market, with some plants undergoing maintenance.
West of Suez, the Tampa DAP benchmark remains unchanged due to a lack of business. The domestic DAP market is under pressure following Mosaic’s announcement and imported product due to arrive at Nola.
On the supply front, PhosAgro has announced it is planning to increase complex fertilizers and NPS sales in the domestic and regional markets. This move might take some pressure of an oversupplied market that is facing weak DAP/MAP demand and low prices.
DAP US GULF FOB AND NORTH AFRICA FOB PRICE COMPARISON
Greenstar Fertilizers is planning to double its phosphoric acid production capacity as part of a $47m expansion plan.
The company will increase its production capacity from 75,000 tonnes/ year to 150,000 tonnes/year, will build an additional ammonia storage facility with a capacity of 15,000 tonnes and install an additional unit to produce 600,000 tonnes/year of DAP in the next three years.
The phosphoric acid expansion will take 12 to 18 months and at the moment the company is in the process of getting environmental and other clearances.
In Pakistan, United Agro is understood to have bought 30,000 tonnes of Australian DAP from Quantum at $392/tonne CFR shipped in January.
The DAP price range has been moved notionally to reflect this deal.
In Bangladesh, no award has been heard under the 20 January BCIC tender for 10,000 tonnes (+/-5%) of phosphoric acid (52-54% P2O5).
In China, no large-volume export deals were heard because inventories in India were ample and demand was limited.
Golden Barley delivered 4,000 tonnes of Chinese cargoes to Malaysian NAFAS in the low-$370s/tonne CFR. Freight is estimated at $5/tonne, so the price range has been decreased to $365-370/tonne FOB.
The domestic DAP market remained bearish. Market participants were waiting for an improvement in winter storage after the Lunar New Year holiday next week. The bearish fertilizer market dampened the DAP market sentiment. Distributors were not active in buying and few buy-out deals were heard. Offers for 64% DAP at Yingkou port were at CNY2,600/tonne EXWH, flat from last week. Offers for 64% DAP in Xinjiang were at CNY2,900-3,000/tonne ex-station, down by CNY100/tonne at the low end.
Overall operating rates of domestic DAP plants were stable around 55%. Yuntianhua shut three lines, with a total capacity of 1.8m tonnes/year.
Kailin is heard to have postponed its scheduled maintenance to February.
The MAP market remained soft this week. Deliveries and discussions became more limited with the Lunar New Year holiday in sight. Downstream compound fertilizer producers mainly have completed their pre-holiday purchases of MAP. Only a few MAP producers were still delivering cargoes. Traded prices for 55% domestic MAP powder were largely at CNY1,800-1,850/tonne. Discussions were still done on a case-by-case basis. Export orders were very scarce this week.
ASIA
In India, the market is subdued, as buyers are waiting for the announcement of the new budget and subsidies at the end of February. Also, DAP stocks are heard to be high and sufficient for six months.
There has been a rumour in the market that Aries sold Chinese DAP at $380/tonne CFR, but this has been denied by the trader.
No offers have been heard under the MMTC 27 January purchase tender for 80,000 tonnes (+/- 20%) of DAP.
Overall operating rates at domestic MAP plants was at 40-50%. Many producers in Hubei cut their operating rates recently. Large producers in Sichuan have shut plants for maintenance in advance ahead of the holiday.
Yunnan Three Circles-Sinochem Fertilizers ran its MAP unit around 50%.
Stocks of DAP in Beihai are heard at 47,000 tonnes, while stocks at Zhangjiang total 120,000 tonnes of DAP and 40,000 tonnes of TSP.
A vessel was fixed to load 10,000 tonnes of phosphoric acid at Jiangyin
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

In Malaysia, NAFAS is understood to have bought 4,000 tonnes of Chinese DAP from Golden Barley in the low-$370s/tonne CFR in a combination cargo.
In Korea, Chobi is heard to have issued a tender for 3,000 tonnes of DAP, but no offers have been heard.
EUROPE
In Russia, PhosAgro is selling DAP tonnes to north Europe.
The producer is asking $350-380/tonne FOB for DAP/MAP to Europe and still has availability for February.
Production is running at 100% and there might be maintenance from March.
The producer has already shipped two NP cargoes to Ethiopia under its previous tender and will ship one more.
PhosAgro is planning to increase complex fertilizers and NPS sales in the domestic and regional markets.
The Baltic MAP price range has been edged downwards to reflect business in Brazil. Freight is estimated at $15/tonne.
PhosAgro produced 2.643m tonnes of DAP/MAP in 2015, up 11.7% from the 2.367m tonnes produced in 2014, according to the company’s operating results for 2015. NPK production was 1.923m tonnes, up 11.4% from 1.725m tonnes in 2014. Meanwhile, phosphate rock production rose 4.7% to 7.853m tonnes and phosphoric acid production was 9.3% higher at 2.114m tonnes.
DAP/MAP sales totalled 2.639m tonnes, up 11.6% from the 2.364m tonnes sold in 2014. NPK sales were 1.879m tonnes, up 11.8% from the 2014 total of 1.680m tonnes. Phosphate rock sales, excluding intra-group sales, were 1.962m tonnes, down 18% year on year. Phosphoric acid sales were just 41,100 tonnes in 2015, down 20.3% from the 51,600 tonnes sold in 2014.
In the UK, buyers are in no hurry to make purchases, as the application has not started yet.
DAP prices are heard at $420/tonne CIF for small volumes.
One DAP cargo is heard arriving on the east coast in February, with one more expected on the west coast. The origin is unknown.
It is understood that a TSP cargo has loaded in Lebanon for two UK ports.
In Turkey, Gemlik is understood to have bought 15,000 tonnes of
direct hedge Fertilizer Swaps Price Indications
4 February 2016
Tunisian DAP together with a distributor at $375-380/tonne FOB duty unpaid, but this has not been confirmed.
There is talk that Russian DAP has been sold at $395/tonne CFR, but this has not been confirmed.
OCP is heard to have sold DAP to Gemlik and Gubretas in January for February loading.
In Benelux, DAP prices are heard at $400-430/tonne (€357-384/ tonne) FCA.
AMERICAS
In the US, Mosaic announced that it will reduce production in its phosphate business due to low crop prices and weak demand.
The producer said it will implement a plan of rotating plant shutdowns in Q1 which will drop production by 400,000 tonnes.
No export business out of Tampa has been concluded this week.
In the domestic market, Mosaic sold one DAP barge at $335/short ton FOB for prompt loading.
DAP barges have traded in the $312-326/short ton FOB Nola, with prices gaining momentum following Mosaic’s announcement.
Market participants deem Mosaic’s price at $335/short ton FOB too high and thus it has not been included in this week’s price range.
MAP barges are heard at the same price as DAP prices.
In Central Florida, Mosaic sold DAP trucks at $370/short ton FOB plant, with MAP at a $10/short ton premium.
OCP is heard to have shipped a DAP/MAP cargo to Nola for Koch in January and will ship another one in February.
DAP offers ex-warehouse are heard at $360/tonne St Paul, with MAP at $365/tonne.
Demand is expected to pick up in the coming weeks for spring, also aided by the imported product arriving at Nola.
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

Heringer is understood to have bought Russian MAP at $325/tonne CFR.
Ameropa is heard to have offered Mexican MAP at $320/tonne CFR, but this has not been confirmed.
The price range has been lowered to reflect this offer and business concluded.
Buyers are heard making opportunistic purchases trying to take advantage of the weak market as there is no major demand.
In Mexico, AFT/Fertinal has a 40,000-45,000-tonne MAP/MAP with zinc for Australia in mid-February, followed by 40,000 tonnes of DAP/ MAP/TSP to Chile.
In Argentina, Nitron sold a total of 5,000 tonnes of Russian DAP/ MAP at $335/tonne CFR for February shipment.
AFRICA/MIDDLE EAST
Offers of North African DAP to Europe are heard at $400-420/tonne FOB. No bids have been heard.
The price range has been moved notionally to reflect offers.
In Tunisia, GCT is understood to have sold DAP to Gemlik at $375- 380/tonne FOB, but this has not been confirmed.
In the first eight months of 2015, GCT produced only 1.6m tonnes of phosphates, below expectations of 4.2m tonnes.
In Morocco, OCP is heard shipping two DAP/MAP cargoes to Nola for Koch in January/February.
OCP has commissioned its new $537m plant at Jorf Lasfar that will produce a range of fertilizers for domestic consumption and the African market.
The facility can produce up to 1m tonnes/year of phosphate fertilizers, 1.4m tonnes/year of sulphuric acid and 450,000 tonnes/year of phosphoric acid.
From 2015 to 2023, OCP plans to commission ten phosphate complexes, each with a 1m tonne/year granulation capacity.
The producer is planning to increase fertilizer production to 12m tonnes/year by 2017, up from 4.5m tonnes/year in 2010.
There is a freight enquiry to load 4,000 tonnes of phosphoric acid in Ras Selaata, Lebanon, in first half February for shipment to Spain.
In Jordan, JPMC settled the price for first half 2016 deliveries to Indian buyers for phosphate rock 73-75 BPL at $120/tonne FOB with 30 days’ credit for January-May loading.
The price has dropped from $130/tonne FOB for late 2015 loadings in Aqaba for customers in India.
JPMC has no scheduled DAP shipments for India in February.
In Saudi Arabia, SABIC has postponed its availability to the beginning of the March due to slow demand.
The producer is asking $370s/tonne FOB for DAP/MAP.
Ma’aden is shipping one 30,000-40,000-tonne DAP/MAP cargo to Australia under formula for late February loading.
Investors have agreed to provide $11.25m and an exploration permit which will be used to advance a Republic of Senegal phosphate project, Australia fertilizer developer Avenira Limited announced.
Officials said agreements with Mimran Natural Resources (MNR) and Tablo Corporation include the transfer of MNR’s phosphate exploration permit to Avenira subsidiary Baobab Mining and Chemicals Corporation (BMCC), in exchange for the 20% of the capital in BMCC.
Follow Sylvia Traganida on Twitter @ICIS_Sylvia for daily tweets on the latest phosphates information.
Ammonia
OVERVIEW
Ammonia spot prices fell sharply in Asia Pacific following a deal between Namhae and Yara, but suppliers in other parts of the world continue to resist similar falls for now. Market fundamentals remain weak and the mood bearish. Next Black Sea business is expected to take place at a lower level, with demand from the US not forecast to materialise until at least early March.
Mosaic will significantly reduce DAP and MAP output for at least the next eight weeks. The US producer, which recently agreed a $40/tonne discount with Yara for the February Tampa price, will implement a plan of rotating shutdowns that will cut quarterly production by around 400,000 tonnes and impact its ammonia requirements.
Moroccan phosphates giant OCP has yet to find anyone prepared to meet its price target of $280/tonne CFR Jorf Lasfar – a level that would represent a Yuzhny netback of around $240/tonne FOB. The producer commissioned one of its large fertilizer units this week, hence why so much ammonia has moved to the Atlantic port in recent weeks.
East of Suez, FACT India scrapped its second tender in as many weeks after it failed to attract any offers. The group immediately reissued the enquiry, but suppliers are sceptical it will find any product given the February and March delivery windows are exactly the same.
In Asia Pacific, Namhae purchased 15,000 tonnes of Australian spot material from Yara at $347/tonne CFR Yeosu, well below the $375- 380/tonne CFR Ulsan agreed between Mitsui and SFC for 7,000 tonnes last month. Namhae also secured 10,000-13,000 tonnes of Black Sea spot ammonia from Koch, although that price is above that agreed with Yara.
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

YUZHNY FOB V ARABIAN GULF FOB PRICE COMPARISON
black sea
In Yuzhny, spot availability for this month remains unclear, with no new business heard. One producer suggested prices may slip slightly and then rebound next month – when US demand is expected to emerge. Koch is among the parties interested in loading product over the next few weeks, but no price targets have been disclosed.
OCP continues to chase CFR prices that would net back to around $235/tonne FOB, but suppliers are resisting such aggressive prices for now. A Turkish buyer with a price target of $250/tonne FOB is seeking a late February/early March cargo, but no deal has been concluded.
Nitora will load its next cargo of OPZ ammonia in March, but has yet to nominate a vessel. OPZ continues to run only one of its two ammonia units.
Dnipro remains focused on domestic customers rather than export cargoes.
Prices remain unchanged at $270-280/tonne FOB.
Yuzhny line up for february, ’000 tonnes
Yuzhny line up for january, ’000 tonnes
baltic and northwest europe
In the Baltic, no fresh spot business has been heard, with Uralchem still understood to have at least 20,000 tonnes available for lifting from Ventspils in February. There is speculation Koch may look to conclude a deal for a larger cargo for March loading, possibly on the Clipper Neptun.
The Temse departed Ventspils on 2 February with an 8,000-tonne cargo for discharge in Scandinavia or northwest Europe for Yara.
The Odin sailed from Sillamae on 31 January with around 25,500 tonnes of TogliattiAzot ammonia for discharge in northwest Europe for a pair of Ameropa customers.
The Coral Ivory lifted 4,000 tonnes for Yara from Ventspils on 3 February for discharge at one of the group’s plants in Scandinavia.
In Belgium, the Odin arrived at Antwerp on 4 February with more than 25,000 tonnes of Baltic ammonia for long term Ameropa customers BASF and EuroChem.
In the Netherlands, the Nashwan is expected to discharge up to 15,000 tonnes of Caribbean ammonia at Rotterdam for OCI later this month. The vessel made an identical voyage in January amid talk Koch is returning a swap from an OCI Beaumont cargo from the US a few weeks ago.
In France, Yara has nominated the Pertusola for its next delivery to Ambes, with the vessel scheduled to arrive on 6 February with around 10,000 tonnes.
The Antarcticgas delivered a combined 10,000 tonnes of British ammonia to Yara’s plants at Montoir and Le Havre 29-31 January.
In Germany, the Antarcticgas will discharge up to 10,000 tonnes at Rostock on 6 February for Yara.
In the UK, the Antarcticgas departed Immingham on 3 February with up to 10,000 tonnes for Yara for discharge in northwest Europe.
In Norway, the Navigator Gusto will discharge up to 15,000 tonnes of Algerian product at Porsgrunn on 7 February on behalf of Yara. The Nijinksy will likely deliver a similar quantity of Libyan product to the same port and/or Glomfjord mid-month.
In Sweden, the Coral Ivory arrived at Koping on 31 January with 4,000 tonnes of Baltic ammonia for Yara.
In Finland, the Coral Ivory will deliver 4,000 tonnes of Baltic ammonia
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

turkey and mediterranean
In Turkey, Bagfas has sufficient inventory at present and will not require 10,000 tonnes of spot ammonia until first half March, rather than late February. The buyer is targeting a Yuzhny netback of around $250/tonne FOB.
The Marycam Swan delivered parcels of Black Sea product to Aliaga and Mersin for long term customers of Trammo this week. The trader will use the same vessel to deliver 10,000 tonnes of Egyptian ammonia to Toros under contract in first half February.
In Spain, the Navigator Grace will deliver 7,000-12,000 tonnes of Algerian ammonia to new long term Trammo customer Ube at Castellon on 5 February.
The Queen Isabella delivered Algerian ammonia parcels to Huelva and Sagunto on 1 February and 30 January, respectively, for Fertiberia.
In Israel, the Marycam Swan delivered a parcel of Black Sea ammonia to Haifa on 2 February for a long term Trammo client. The vessel will return with a further 5,000-10,000 tonnes later in the month.
africa
In Algeria, the Navigator Grace sailed from Arzew on 3 February with 7,000-12,000 tonnes of Sorfert spot ammonia recently-acquired by Trammo and priced under formula.
Sorfert was last heard running one ammonia unit and one urea line following recent technical issues. The producer loaded the Navigator Gusto with 15,000 tonnes for Yara on 31 January.
Around the same time, Fertial loaded the Pertusola with about 11,000 tonnes at Annaba for the Norwegian firm. The manufacturer will load the Andesgas and Queen Isabella for Fertiberia in the next few days for discharge on the Iberian Peninsula.
In Morocco, OCP continues to meet significant resistance from suppliers over its aggressive price target of $280/tonne CFR Jorf Lasfar for February cargoes. Such a price would net back to $235-240/tonne FOB Yuzhny, a range considered far too low by producers and traders.
The phosphates producer this week commissioned a new fertilizer facility that will increase its ammonia consumption.
The Gas Manta and SCF Tobolsk arrived at Jorf Lasfar this week with 23,400 tonnes each from PCS and Trammo, respectively. However, the Sanko Innovator will not deliver a similar-sized cargo from NF Trading as she was rerouted to Turkey by Trammo.
In Tunisia, the Navigator Grace sailed from Gabes a few days ago after completing the discharge of 15,000 tonnes of Black Sea ammonia from long term partner Ameropa. The supplier will likely send 24,500 tonnes to the port on the Solaro in late February.
In Egypt, Trammo will load 10,000 tonnes of Abu Qir spot ammonia shortly following a previously-announced deal. A formula price of around $255/tonne FOB has been heard, but not confirmed. The cargo will go to Turkey on the Marycam Swan.
In Libya, the Nijinsky arrived at Marsa El Brega on 3 February to load
up to 15,000 tonnes of Lifeco product for Yara. The producer was last heard operating one ammonia unit and one urea line.
In Madagascar, the Gas Columbia will deliver 14,000 tonnes to a long term customer of Trammo shortly after the trader closed a swap with Muntajat.
The vessel will then head to Richards Bay in South Africa with 9,500 tonnes for two contract clients of the Qatari supplier. The pair will receive a further 14,000 tonnes from Trammo later this month as part of the return swap, but the trader has yet to decide where to source the cargo.
middle east
Producers continue to report healthy demand from buyers in India and spot availability for February appears limited amid plant issues in Qatar. This is reflected in a string of tenders from FACT India failing to attract offers from the usual suppliers like CIFC and Muntajat.
Arabian Gulf prices have been notionally reduced $290-$300/tonne FOB to reflect latest contract prices in Korea, based on freight costs of around $90/tonne.
In Saudi Arabia, no fresh business has been concluded by SABIC and the manufacturer has yet to outline spot availability for the rest of the quarter. Last week, SABIC sold 23,000 spot tonnes to Mitsui priced under formula for second half March loading.
The following cargoes are scheduled to load at Saudi ports in February and March:
•23,400 tonnes on the Al-Jabirah in Ras Al-Khair (RK) for discharge in Asia Pacific, 5 February
•23,400 tonnes on the Rose Gas in Jubail for discharge in India, 15 February
•23,400 tonnes on the Al-Barrah in RK for discharge in Asia Pacific, 15 February
•23,400 tonnes on a vessel TBN in Jubail or RK for Mitsui, 2H March
In Qatar, the QAFCO IV ammonia plant continues to run at 75% capacity due to technical issues and will be taken offline for 7-8 days in the near future to enable repairs to be carried out.
The plant’s urea unit is running normally, as are QAFCO’s other five ammonia and urea plants at the Mesaieed fertilizer and chemicals complex. As a result, Muntajat has no spot ammonia availability for the foreseeable future.
Muntajat reports contract netbacks of $324-325/tonne FOB for cargoes that loaded in January. This range is not considered representative of February price levels.
In Bahrain/Kuwait, PIC expects to have 10,000-15,000 tonnes available for loading in late March. The producer may exit the nitrogen fertilizer market in 2017 and close its Shuiaba ammonia and urea operations due to expansion in its olefins and aromatics business. (See also News)
In Iran, CIFC will load the Gas Cat in BIK in mid-February, while the Gas Line entered dry dock for a few weeks.
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

india
FACT reissued its tender for up to 15,000 tonnes of ammonia for arrival at Kochi (Cochin) in February and first half March after the original enquiry that closed on 1 February failed to attract any offers.
The group still requires 7,500 tonnes (+/- 5%) at the west coast port during February and 5,000-7,500 tonnes (+/- 5%) 1-15 March. Offers should be submitted by 14:30 local time on 5 February, and are requested to remain valid until 10th February.
FACT previously scrapped its 21 January tender for 2 x 7,500 tonnes for February arrival after offers of $410/tonne CFR sight from Trammo and Muntajat were deemed too high.
The Rose Gas delivered 10,000 tonnes of spot product priced at $361/ tonne CFR to PPL/Paradip on 31 January on behalf of SABIC. The vessel will then deliver 3,500 tonnes priced at the same level to Zuari/ Goa on 6 February from the same supplier. Both deals were concluded several weeks ago.
The Gas Cobia will discharge 23,400 tonnes of Black Sea spot ammonia for IFFCO/Kandla in mid-February under a deal with Ameropa. The cargo is heard priced at $380/tonne CFR and was sold several weeks ago.
Long term Muntajat customer SPIC/Tuticorin received 8,500 tonnes of Saudi product on the Cambridge on 31 January from Muntajat. The vessel then discharged 10,500 tonnes at CIL/Kakinada and 4,400 tonnes at CIL/Vizag.
CIL/Kakinada will also receive 6,500 tonnes of Iranian contract ammonia from CIFC on 6 February when the Gas Cat berths.
The Almarona delivered up to 4,500 tonnes of Qatari ammonia to long term Muntajat client CIL/Vizag on 3 February. The vessel also discharged 5,000 tonnes at MCFL/Mangalore and 5,500 tonnes at TataChem/Haldia.
The Clipper Mars will discharge 40,000 tonnes of contract Black Sea ammonia at IFFCO/Paradip in second half February on behalf of Ameropa.
Prices have been notionally reduced to $330-340/tonne CFR to reflect lower prices in the Middle East and a slide in spot and contract prices in Asia Pacific.
In Bangladesh, the Gaschem Dollart will lift 3,000 tonnes of KAFCO spot ammonia from Chittagong on 5 February under a previously- confirmed purchase by Mitsui.
asia pacific
In Korea, Namhae purchased 15,000 tonnes of Australian spot ammonia from Yara at $347/tonne CFR Yeosu for early March delivery. Namhae also agreed a deal with Koch for up to 10,000 tonnes of Black Sea spot ammonia at a higher price for early March delivery. That cargo will be delivered by the Clipper Orion 2-6 March.
There is talk of offers in the $310-324/tonne CFR range for next business, but such low levels remain unconfirmed for now and have not been included in our price assessment.
Mitsui has emerged as the seller of 7,000 tonnes of spot ammonia priced at slightly above $375/tonne CFR that will be delivered to Ulsan for SFC in the next 10-12 days. According to the supplier, the parcel will be sourced in Indonesia rather than the Arabian Gulf.
SFC’s ammonia requirements will fall in October when client Tongsuh Petrochemical performs a one-month turnaround at its 245,000-tonne/ year ACN unit at Ulsan.
Prices are assessed at $347-385/tonne CFR to reflect latest spot and contract levels.
Confirmed Korean ammonia deliveries, ‘000 tonnes
SFC
In Taiwan, no fresh spot business has been heard, with the requirements of CPDC, TFC and Formosa all covered by contract cargoes or previously-announced spot deals. CPDC had been linked to a potential spot deal with Koch, but Korea’s Namhae is the buyer of the Black Sea cargo.
Contract prices at CPDC have fallen to $380/tonne CFR Taichung, slightly higher than what TFC expects to pay for its March cargo from
SABIC.
CPDC is expected to take its 240,000-tonne/year ACN unit at Kaohsiung offline for one week in May and for 2-3 weeks in November for routine maintenance.
Slightly ahead of schedule, CPDC received 15,000 tonnes of contract volume on 2 February when the Gaz Millennium delivered an Indonesian cargo from Mitsui.
Formosa is poised to restart its 280,000-tonne/year ACN plant at Mailiao following a one-month scheduled turnaround that started on 8 January. The firm will receive 15,000 tonnes of Australian spot product from Yara very soon and is set to receive a similar quantity
Confirmed Taiwanese ammonia deliveries, ‘000 tonnes
CPDC
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

Prices are assessed at $370-380/tonne CFR, with the high representing CPDC’s latest contract price and the low end notionally reduced to reflect lower spot prices in the wider region.
In Indonesia, no fresh spot business has been heard and no sales tenders announced by producers.
CJ is heard to have awarded its 1 February tender for 6,000 tonnes of ammonia at $368/tonne CFR to local supplier Petrokima Gresik. The spot volume will be delivered to the buyer in first half February, almost certainly by trucks rather than marine vessel.
CJ’s early January tender for February delivery was awarded to Fertcomm at $380-385/tonne CFR.
Mitsui will load the Gaz Millennium and Gaz Serenity with 15,000 tonnes each of KPA ammonia in Bontang 7-8 February. Trammo is expected to use the SCF Tomsk to load 23,400 tonnes of KPI product from the port in mid-February.
In Thailand, Mitsui used the Nordic River to deliver a contract cargo of Malaysian ammonia to a long term customer at Map Ta Phut on 2 February. The cargo was a return swap from PETRONAS.
Mitsubishi plans to send 15,000 tonnes under contract to PTT Asahi in mid-March, but has yet to determine where it will source the cargo. PTT Asahi is understood to have scheduled a one-month turnaround at its 200,000-tonne/year ACN unit for May.
In Malaysia, PETRONAS is expected to load the Bunga Kemboja with 16,000 tonnes in Kerteh shortly after the vessel arrived at the port on 1 February.
In late January, the producer loaded the Nordic River with at least 12,000 tonnes for discharge elsewhere in the region after agreeing a swap with Mitsui.
In Vietnam, Mitsui will use the Gaschem Dollart to deliver 3,000 tonnes to at least one long term customer at Dinh Vu next week.
In Japan, the Berlian Ekuator discharged a parcel of Indonesia ammonia at Mizushima around 2 February for a contract client of Trammo.
Asahi Kasei’s ammonia requirements will be reduced for 6-7 weeks from mid-February due to a scheduled turnaround at its 200,000-tonne/year ACN unit.
In China, BASF issued a purchase tender for 8,000 tonnes of spot ammonia for 1-10 March arrival at Caojing. The tender will close on 5 February, although no further details or price bids have been heard.
Secco will receive around 14,000 tonnes of contract ammonia from long term partner Mitsui when the Gas Quantum arrives at Caojing later month. The buyer’s ammonia needs will fall in September or October as a one month turnaround at its 260,000-tonne/year ACN plant has been scheduled.
In Australia, the Viking River departed Dampier on 28 January with at least 15,000 tonnes for a spot customer of Yara in Taiwan.
The vessel is expected to return to the port in mid-February to load up to 25,500 tonnes, with the Nordic River also likely to arrive later in the month.
americas
In the US, the market was fairly inactive as demand for ammonia has yet to appear and is likely to stay muted for several more weeks until winter ends and farmers return to the fields. Expectations are for another massive corn crop and with retail levels sliding lower, sentiment is buying interest will be significant through the first part of the spring season.
Mosaic will significantly reduce DAP and MAP output for the next eight weeks. The US producer, which recently agreed a $40/tonne discount with Yara for the February Tampa price, will implement a plan of rotating plant shutdowns that will cut production by 400,000 tonnes.
Whether this building of demand is enough to give ammonia prices an immediate boost is unclear. Future pricing direction is likely to become clearer during the annual conference of The Fertilizer Institute (TFI) which gets underway in Orlando, Florida, on 8 February.
For some participants there is a sense the rough times could now give way to a slight recovery with the return of spring sowings. However, one obstacle to overcome will be the bearish view of buyers, although sellers are adamant prices will firm sooner rather than later.
Mosaic illustrated its ammonia needs will be reduced during Q1 by announcing curtailments in phosphates production due to poor market conditions. The manufacturer said delayed purchases are being seen during the seasonal period of weak demand, but it expects to see a more positive result over the long-term. An uptick in this segment could incrementally benefit ammonia and give a boost for an upward climb in pricing levels.
There is also talk Koch is trying to secure plenty of tonnes for March, which could underpin higher prices, especially if crop demand emerges at the same time. There are some shortages present in parts of the key crop regions and with retail levels reflecting the market decline, buying inquiries are understood to be increasing.
Crop prices have continued to exhibit some firmness, especially within corn futures, which may persuade farmers to acquire ammonia and other crop inputs.
Commodity prices are expected to stay within their current range through the first quarter, although weather disruptions leading to planting delays could create uncertainty.
On 3 February, the March corn price close at $3.71/bu, up two cents week-on-week, while soyabeans slipped six cents week-on-week to $8.77/bu.
The average retail price of ammonia this week is reported at $569/ short ton ex-dealer, down $12/short ton week-on-week.
In Trinidad, despite talk of a spike in natural gas curtailment rates, ammonia producers continue to experience cuts of 10-15%. Manufacturers anticipate stable feedstock levels for the quarter as no new maintenance periods have been revealed.
Yara, which will reveal its fourth quarter results on 11 February, has
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

However, the producer has announced an impairment charge for Yara Trinidad of around NK380m (43.6m). (See also News)
In Bolivia, state energy producer Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales Bolivianos (YPFB) signed a statement of intent with Petrobras to establish commercial relations to market fertilizers in Brazil and other countries in the region.
YPFB said the deal will analyse possible synergies in the Tres Lagoas (Brazil) and the Bulo Bulo (Bolivia) projects. The $900m Bulo ammonia and urea plant should come on line later this year. Construction of Petrobras’ Nitrogen Fertilizer Unit III at Tres Lagoas has been on hold for over a year following a construction dispute.
In Chile, the Touraine is scheduled to arrive at Mejillones around 6 February with 23,400 tonnes of Venezuelan ammonia for a long term client of Trammo. The supplier expects to send the Sylvie with a similar- sized cargo of Caribbean product to the same customer later this month.
Sulphur
OVERVIEW
The sulphur market started the week how it left off last week, with poor demand in China continuing to pull prices down. Average operating rates for DAP were around 55%, with MAP at 40-50% in China. Internationally, phosphate operating rates were cut because of poor demand and high levels of inventories of both sulphur and phosphates.
Tasweeq’s February price announcement at a reduction of $30/tonne, followed by ADNOC which moved its price down by $17/tonne were received with mixed reviews.
A number of traders sounded rather disgruntled about Tasweeq’s decision to move its February price to $89/tonne FOB Ras Laffan. Others said the price was fitting with the wider market, particularly for imports to China with freight currently around $8-10/tonne. ADNOC’s February price was deemed unworkable for China and even India, at $115/tonne FOB Ruwais.
Sinopec also started the week with offers at lower levels.
Because of the free fall in the value of spot benchmark prices in China, Q1 contract price negotiations have been rather protracted, although the European contract price has now settled at a reduction of $5/ tonne.
TASWEEQ QSP
Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2016 2016
Source: ICIS
In the UAE, ADNOC set its OSP for February sulphur shipments to India at $105/tonne FOB Ruwais, which marks a decrease of $17/ tonne from January.
ADNOC OSP
Far more closely related to international contract price developments is the North Africa contract price, which was understood to have settled.
In the Americas, lower prices were heard, with Brazil now quoted at $110-115/tonne CFR. Prices out of Vancouver and US Gulf were $100/tonne FOB and lower. Attempts by sellers to push for a number below $90/tonne FOB were met by suggestions of blocking.
MIDDLE EAST
In Qatar, Tasweeq decreased its QSP for February by $30/tonne to $89/tonne/tonne FOB Ras Laffan.
Market reaction to the QSP was mixed, with some sources describing it as fitting in the current climate following the sharp falls since in China in recent weeks. Others thought the price too low.
Sulphur imports from Qatar accounted for 5% of China’s total 2015 import volumes at 638,743 tonnes.
Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2015 2016 2016
Source: ICIS
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

In relation to Q1 contracts with North Africa, ADNOC said that it settled in the mid/high-$120s/tonne CFR. The price was unconfirmed by OCP.
In related news, Occidental Petroleum said in an interview it was looking at the possibility to expand the Al Hosn sour gas project in Abu Dhabi which reached full production at the end of 2015. Adu Dhabi has expressed its wish to have additional gas.
In Saudi Arabia, Saudi Aramco Trading will announce its March price on 10 February. No indications were given as to what the price might be.
The Middle East price range has moved down at the high end to represent ADNOC’s February OSP.
ASIA
In China, prices moved down again this week driven by poor demand and lower prices published by Middle East producers. Price assessments were made largely on a notional basis by traders who said virtually no spot trades had taken place. Bids were heard in the $80s/ tonne CFR, but traders believed this to be price testing since buyers were sufficiently covered leading up to the holidays.
It was no longer possible to do business at $100/tonne CFR, with $85- 95/tonne CFR deemed reflective, most sources agreed.
The only trade noted as for a cargo of crushed lump sulphur from the FSU which sold in the mid-$80s/tonne CFR.
The short and near term outlook remains hazy and sources say it will not be clear if the market will weaken further or start to recover on renewed demand until the middle of February.
At Nantong, the local market was bearish, with offers moving towards $102-107/tonne CFR. Most cargoes negotiated were to be shipped in March. Some lower prices were also heard because supply and vessel capacity varied in different regions. Some Chinese buyers counterbid at above $90/tonne CFR. Most domestic traders took a wait-and-see stance before the holiday. In addition, more cargoes are expected to arrive at Nanjing port later because the unloading of liquid sulphur in Shandong was restricted. At Qingdao, sentiment was also subdued. Offers for Japanese and South Korean liquid sulphur were largely stable at around $100/tonne CFR, with deals negotiated in the mid- $90s/tonne CFR amid limited supply. Some deals were shifted to Yangtze River ports, partly because of the solidification of crushed lump sulphur. However, some market participants said overseas suppliers were unwilling to offer for large volumes and their lower spot offers were only available to contract buyers. At Fangcheng, large downstream producers adopted a wait-and-see stance, intending to keep prices under pressure.
The following cargoes were heard arriving at the ports:
•45,000 tonnes of granular sulphur from Kazakhstan at Nantong for a trader
•40,000 tonnes of granular sulphur at Zhenjiang for a downstream producer
•66,000 tonnes of granular sulphur at Fangcheng for various owners
Inventories at the major ports increased by 60,000 tonnes week on week.
Chinese-Formed Sulphur Inventory Levels, ’000 tonnes
The Chinese domestic market was bearish. Buyers began to stand on the sidelines ahead of the Chinese Lunar New Year holiday. Small- volume deals for granular sulphur were concluded at yuan (CNY) 860/ tonne at ports along the Yangtze River and a few deals for crushed lump cargoes packed in bags were concluded at Qingdao. Large downstream producers at Fangcheng port adopted a wait-and-see stance towards the import and spot markets.
At Nantong, cargo-holders in the spot market were not affected by the official offers in Qatar and were waiting to see the post-holiday market movements. Offers for granular sulphur were CNY860-870/ tonne, with deals negotiated at the same level. Some lower offers for futures cargoes were available. Offers were at CNY840-850/tonne for granular sulphur at around CNY830/tonne for crushed lump sulphur, with lower prices heard. Some major downstream producers said they would not buy from the futures market or Sinopec Puguang Gasfield because the domestic and the overseas phosphate markets were bearish. Some downstream producers negotiated on a hand-to-mouth basis. Counterbids for spot granular sulphur were at CNY850/tonne. Counterbids for futures granular sulphur were in the low CNY800s/ tonne, while those for futures crushed lump sulphur were at similar levels. Traders were under cost pressure and preferred to pay attention to the market after the holiday. Some downstream producers bought small-volume granules at around CNY860/tonne.
At Qingdao, granular sulphur was notionally pegged above CNY900/ tonne. Traders at the port were less active and downstream chemical producers were on holiday. Most negotiations were about bagged crushed lump sulphur. Some small-volume deals, ranging from dozens of tonnes to several hundred tonnes have been agreed at CNY890- 900/tonne. Some downstream producers were not able to pay in cash and prices of deals with a payment period were equivalent to CNY875-880/tonne in cash. In the domestic market, some refiners cut their EXW prices.
At Fangcheng, prices were above CNY800/tonne. Downstream producers bid lower to drag down prices, with import prices taken as a reference. Some deals for granular sulphur were said to have been completed at CNY830-850/tonne since last week, but some cargo-holders were reluctant to sell at such levels. With import prices dropping further, downstream producers concluding deals earlier said they were reluctant to purchase at CNY830-850/tonne. The market for domestic sulphur saw a broad price range. The price gap between solid and liquid cargoes was also wide, with prices heard ranging from over CNY700/tonne to over CNY800/tonne. Recent deals for
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

Sinopec Puguang Gasfield cut its offers by a total of CNY50/tonne to CNY880/tonne EXWH for cargoes at Wanzhou port and by CNY30/ tonne to CNY870/tonne EXW for truck cargoes at Dazhou in Sichuan. The producer reported little inventory pressure, offering variable discounts according to purchasing volumes. Some downstream producers adopted a wait-and-see stance towards lower offers at Wanzhou port from Puguang Gasfield.
In New Caledonia, Vale has secured its next 50,000-tonne sulphur cargo for its nickel operations at $100/tonne FOB Vancouver.
The cargo will load at the end of March for mid-April arrival.
INDIA
In India, spot demand has been limited, with buyers only concentrating on contract volumes. But some renewed local buying for import cargoes, rather than from local refineries, surfaced with sulphur now quoted at $108-115/tonne CFR.
In shipping news, 40,000 tonnes will arrive on the Navios Hios at Paradip for IFCCO and PPL.
AMERICAS
In Canada, prices continue to move down on the back of the losses seen in China, falling demand and rising stocks internationally. Sellers did not expect to see much demand, at least from China, over the next two weeks because of the Lunar New Year holidays.
A buyer said offers were eroding on almost a daily basis and all prices heard this week were below $100/tonne FOB Vancouver. However, traders said it was not prepared to offer below $100/tonne just yet, although it did not rule out prices moving down for March cargoes.
Freight from Vancouver to China is currently around $7/tonne, according to a local supplier.
Sellers were heard to have suggested they would block rather than reduce offers to below $90/tonne FOB, but this was dismissed by a number of market participants.
Suncor Energy, Canada’s biggest oil sands producer posted a net loss of $2bn in its Q4 2015 earnings because of the collapse in oil prices.
In the US, a trader said spot prices currently under discussion were either side of the Q1 Tampa contract price which settled at $95/long ton.
On the West Coast a supplier said it had not seen any prices fluctuations this week, it did, however, indicate prices could be below $100/tonne FOB California.
The 1m long ton/year Mosaic melter is up and running but at extremely low rates, a company source confirmed.
In Brazil, Vale has now secured its final cargoes to cover its Q1 needs from the US Gulf at $110-115/tonne CFR Brazil.
The Brazil price range has moved down accordingly.
In Mexico, AFT/Fertinal’s next cargo has experienced some delays. The 55,000-tonne cargo should have departed on 2 February from Long Beach, but this has been shifted to 6 February. The company will load its next cargo during the first half of March.
Petróleos Mexicanos through its subsidiary, Pemex Fertilizantes officially announced the acquisition of Grupo Fertinal. In a letter to its clients and suppliers, Maurizio Covarrubias, Vice President of Grupo Fertinal said he was looking forward to improving and guaranteeing the efficient operation of the Mexican fertilizer industry.
AFRICA
In North Africa, confirmation relating to Q1 settlements was unobtainable from OCP Morocco.
However, ADNOC said it has agreed Q1 contracts with OCP in the mid/upper-$120s/tonne CFR North Africa.
SULPHUR SPOT PRICE CHINA V VANCOUVER
According to a Russian supplier, GCT Tunisia has agreed its Q1 contract in the high-$110s/tonne CFR Gabes for granular sulphur.
EUROPE
In Russia, Austrofin said it will not be entering into a Q1 contracts with OCP since Gazprom is not prepared to reduce its price to meet OCP. No indications were given relating to OCP’s bid or Gazprom’s offer.
Contracts have been agreed with GCT, according to Austrofin, in the high $110s/tonne CFR
In northwest Europe, European first-quarter sulphur contract prices have largely settled at reductions of $5/tonne after a rather protracted round of negotiations.
Prior to the holiday period, buyers appeared willing to accept a rollover from the fourth quarter, but owing to the bumpy economic start to 2016 for the sulphur market and falling benchmark prices in China, buyers started to reassess their positions.
During the past weeks, sellers offering rollovers started to talk of
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

On the buying side, some of the largest sulphur buyers for the production of caprolactam had hoped to achieve reductions in double-digits based on the sharp falls seen internationally. However, buyers say the most achieved was a reduction of $5/tonne.
In refinery news, Galp in Portugal is said to have entered a turnaround in January and is due to come back on stream mid-March.
Total’s Lindsey refinery in the UK is understood to have a planned outage scheduled for June/July this year.
MEDITERRANEAN
In Italy, Nuova Solmine said it currently had no opportunities to export sulphuric acid at current levels and has no requirements for sulphur. It is currently planning for a scheduled turnaround in April at its Scarlino facility in Tuscany, Italy. The plant will start to reduce operations at the end of March and the restart is schedule for around 25 April, although no firm dates have been decided yet. As is typical with a planned outage, good quality material may not be produced until early May.
While the company has no spot demand and full sulphur stocks is said it received an offer for around 2,000 tonnes at $80-85/tonne FOB
from a seller in Spain.
Saras has shut a gasoil-producing vacuum distillation unit (VDU) at its 300,000 bbl/day refinery in Sarroch, Italy, for planned maintenance. The facility, situated on the southwest coast of Sardinia, is one of the most complex refineries in Europe and accounts for 15% of Italy’s total refining capacity. The shutdown began in January and will include desulphurisation units.
Even Egypt was heard bidding below $100/tonne CFR, according to a trader.
Another bid was also heard at $85/tonne CFR, but the buyer or location was not specified.
In Turkey, Bagfas confirmed a 5,000 tonne spot purchase from Tupras at $100/tonne CFR. Bagfas expects prices to go even lower.
Spot prices in the Mediterranean have moved down on the back of international price falls and general weak macro-economic conditions, as well as this week’s market discussions.
Prices this week are assessed at $85-105/tonne CFR Med.
There is no need for buyers in the Mediterranean to pay above $105/ tonne CFR Med, a seller to the region stated.
Potash
OVERVIEW
The potash market remains soft globally ahead of the next settlement of contract prices in China and India. However, with the former set to start its Lunar New Year holidays, no agreement is expected until at least mid-March.
Stocks at Chinese ports remain relatively high and when combined with low domestic prices this means buyers are targeting around a $50/tonne discount from the $315/tonne CFR agreed for 2015.
In the US, sellers are heard to be actively searching for buyers. Interest is extremely limited, with sources saying firm bids could secure barges below the current range.
Granular grade prices have been assessed lower in a couple of regions based on offers that emerged at a recent industry event in Latin America.
asia
In southeast Asia, prices for standard grade MOP repeated last week’s fall and eased by $5/tonne on both ends of the range to $270-290/ tonne CFR. No business has been concluded, but offers in countries such as Indonesia and Malaysia are heard below previous levels.
In Indonesia, there is no confirmation as to the price/s that Petrokimia Gresik awarded its tender for 300,000 tonnes of standard MOP to several suppliers. The award was made to Uralkali, BPC, APC and Canpotex. The lowest offer received the largest volume, with the other three suppliers invited to meet the lowest price.
In Malaysia, FELDA has yet to confirm the award of its recent tender for 100,000-150,000 tonnes. The following plantations recently held tenders: United Plantations, Sabah Softwoods, Borneo Samudera, Bumitama Agri, Sinar Mas, BestAgro, Socfindo and Sime Darby.
In India, cargoes continue to arrive at various ports. Talks over the next contract price are not expected to get underway until second half March as market players await the settlement of the China contract price before finalising price targets.
Market players are still waiting for subsidy levels to be announced by the government before firming import and sales plans.
The Aquaprosper will deliver more than 58,000 tonnes of MOP to CIL/ Kakinada on 6 February on behalf of a long term supplier.
In China, demand remains sluggish and traders and downstream participants remain on the sidelines for now.
Expectations for conclusions to contracts are not expected until at least mid-March as people will be away from their desks next week for the Lunar New Year holidays.
Weekly domestic prices are as follows ($1=CNY6.57):
•Russian red MOP at CNY 2,000-2,050/tonne, unchanged. Northeast border CNY 1,900-2,000/tonne, unchanged.
•Russian white MOP at CNY 2,230-2,300/tonne (including VAT), unchanged. Northeast border price at CNY 2,150/tonne, unchanged.
•Canadian red MOP at CNY 2,500-2,680/tonne, unchanged.
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

•Dead Sea MOP at CNY 2,150/tonne, unchanged.
•Domestic prices (Qinghai Salt Lake prices) 57% potash – CNY 1,900/ tonne. 60% potash at CNY 2,080/tonne. 62% potash at CNY 2,150/ tonne, all unchanged.
•Standard SOP at CNY 2,400-2,500/tonne, down CNY 100/tonne.
•Granular SOP at CNY 2,550-2,600/tonne, down CNY 50/tonne.
In Australia, Agrimin Limited has started brine evaporation trials at its Mackay sulphate of potash (SOP) project, the Australian fertilizer developer announced.
The Perth-based firm said two initial trials will be conducted by Independent Metallurgical Operations (IMO) at its facility and that Agrimin’s technical team will work closely with IMO staff to carry out the trials over an estimated 75-day period.
Meanwhile, Salt Lake Potash positive test results at its Lake Wells potash project mean it will initiate a scoping study and has begun discussions with potential engineering firms for that phase of the planned sulphate of potash (SOP) project in Western Australia.
europe
In northwest Europe, no significant demand or deals have been heard and prices are said to remain in the current range of €275-300/ tonne CIF. Prices for standard grade MOP were heard in late January at €265-275/tonne CIF.
In Italy, Russian granular MOP were least heard offered in late January at €280/tonne CIF. Buyers said at the time that bids were around €275/tonne CIF.
In Israel/Jordan and the Baltic, prices for standard grade have been notionally reduced by $5/tonne to reflect netbacks from latest offers in Asia.
americas
In Canada, prices for standard grade MOP and granular MOP have been reduced slightly to reflect latest CFR offers in other parts of the world amid bearish sentiment.
PCS said the government of New Brunswick will conduct an Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) on the closure of the Penobsquis mine, which typically takes about six to eight months for completion, so the producer is expecting completion between April-June.
The producer said it has had water inflow into the mine for several years and has been pumping it out and trucking the brine to the Port of St. John.
Officials said the inflow has been about 100 gallons/minute at a consistent rate which has amounted to about 80 truckloads a day on an ongoing basis, which has added to the cost of operating that mine.
At this time PCS will continue to remove the flow in this manner until the EIA is completed.
In the US, the potash prices in the barge market continue to erode further. While a fall below $200/short ton FOB Nola was not a total surprise, it highlighted the trend of buying interest remaining very weak and short-term demand prospects continuing to be diminished.
The latest price reduction has not sparked renewed interest as the general uncertainty in the direction of crop prices is keeping purchases muted. Sentiment is prices could maintain a downward path if buying for spring plantings does not significantly materialise.
Although barge movement remains limited, trades were done this week at both $198/short ton FOB Nola and $205/short ton FOB Nola for prompt loads.
The average retail price of potash is reported at $391/short ton ex- dealer, down $1/short ton from last week and reversing the previous week’s $1/short ton gain.
In Brazil, no new business has been heard, but offers have fallen to $240-255/tonne CFR. With the off-season almost here, buyers may decide to wait for potential further falls rather than securing cargoes at the current level.
This month’s line-up at Paranagua Port. includes:
•Federal Asahi with around 30,000 tonnes from Uralkali on 8 February
•Intrepid Harvester with 21,000 tonnes on 6 February
News
plant problems deal impairment blow to yara
Scandinavian fertilizer giant Yara has warned it will record an asset impairment charge of around Norwegian kroner (NKr) 930m ($107m) in the fourth quarter because of plant problems in France and Trinidad and Tobago.
The Norwegian manufacturer expects to report an overall impairment charge of NKr1.15bn, operating income of NKr700m and earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) of around NKr3.5bn when its results are released next month.
The impairment charge for Yara’s Montoir facility in France, one of the group’s smallest plants and located on a 30-hectare site where the Loire River meets the Atlantic Ocean, is NKr550m.
Now approaching its 50th year of operation, the facility has an annual production capacity of 200,000-300,000 tonnes nitrate and 300,000-
400,000 tonnes of nitrogen, phosphorous, potash (NPK).
“In addition to small scale, the plant has limited export opportunities and is exposed to lower profitability in its home market, given lower grain prices and also lower phosphate and potash demand,” Yara disclosed.
Turning to ammonia manufacturing operations in the Caribbean, the producer revealed the impairment charge for Yara Trinidad is approximately NK380m.
The Trinidad plant is one of Yara’s smallest ammonia plants, with an annual production capacity of approximately 270,000 tonnes.
The Oslo-headquartered firm also handles around 1m tonnes/year of ammonia from two larger plants on the island owned by Trinidad Nitrogen Co Ltd (Tringen) – a joint venture between Yara and the island’s government.
All but 1% of the three plants’ combined 1.3m tonnes/year of ammonia is exported, all of which loads in Point Lisas, mainly for the US, but also for Brazil.
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

Earlier this week, a Yara source said despite planning to restart the smallest plant around 22 January following a shutdown in early November, the unit has yet to come back on-stream and no date has been fixed for a return to operation
“In addition to the impairment charges, Yara’s fourth-quarter results are impacted by lower sales and production volumes compared with a year earlier, mainly for ammonia and urea where Yara suffered significant production outages during the quarter,” Yara added in today’s statement.
“Deliveries of own-produced ammonia and urea were both down approximately 160,000 tonnes compared with a year earlier, while sales of own-produced nitrates were down approximately 100,000 tonnes. Compound NPK deliveries were in line with a year earlier.”
pemex fertilizantes acquire grupo fertinal
Petróleos Mexicanos through its subsidiary, Pemex Fertilizantes, has announced the acquisition of Grupo Fertinal, a company source confirmed Monday.
In a letter to its clients and suppliers, Maurizio Covarrubias, Vice President of Grupo Fertinal said he was looking forward to “improving and guaranteeing the efficient operation of the Mexican fertilizer industry.”
Covarrubias said: “Today, some small farmers in Mexico have a limited access to the fertilizer supply. In order to tackle this shortage, the acquisition will help to rebuild the domestic market and the supply of the product to those less developed sectors, mainly the ones in the South-Southeast areas of our country, by offering a product based on international standards and competitive prices.
“The new Grupo Fertinal will continue to work in its current markets and will continue to build long term, as well as strong business relationships with current clients, contractors and suppliers which have shown their preference for the well-known worldwide quality and service that are characteristic of Grupo Fertinal.
Fertinal’s top management will remain in their current positions, with potential future changes or adjustments to the structure of the company will be analyzed in detail and informed to the industry in due time, Covarrubias added.
pic mulls closing shuaiba ferts operations
Kuwait’s urea and ammonia fertilizer producer Petrochemical Industries Company (PIC) is considering closing down its fertilizers operations in Shuaiba by the second half 2017 due to expansion in its olefins and aromatics businesses, a company source said late on Thursday.
PIC has a capacity to produce around 1.1m tonnes/year of urea at Shuaiba and over 650,000 tonnes/year of ammonia.
PIC also markets urea for sister company Gulf Petrochemical Industries Company (GPIC) in Sitra at Bahrain, which produces around 650,000 tonnes/year of urea. These operations are understood to not have been affected by the plan.
The decline in urea and ammonia prices is seen to have contributed to the decision to close PIC’s Shuaiba operations.
Over the last two years, granular urea prices have declined by $240/ tonne or 55% in the Arab Gulf to below $200/tonne free on board (FOB) at present. Given the oversupply situation in the global urea market at present, it is unlikely that prices will go back to levels of above $400/tonne FOB seen two years ago any time soon.
Over the last two years, ammonia prices in the Arab Gulf have declined by 52% to $300/tonne FOB at present from around $635/tonne FOB in end-January 2013.
Demand for nitrogen fertilizers has not been able to keep pace with
capacity additions in the sector. Fertilizer importers are grappling with currency devaluation which makes imports more expensive while farmer’s appetite has been hit by declining crop prices and economic slowdown in several countries has hurt demand in general.
ypfb signs fertilizer deal with petrobras
Bolivia’s state energy producer Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales Bolivianos (YPFB) said on Wednesday it has signed a statement of intent with its Brazilian counterpart Petrobras to establish commercial relations to market fertilizers in Brazil and other countries in the region. The deal, which was signed during bilateral talks this week between both countries in Brazil’s capital, Brasilia, will “analyse possible synergies in the Tres Lagoas (Brazil) and the Bulo (Bolivia) fertilizer projects”, YPFB said in a statement.
“Within 15 days, technical teams will be created to establish a methodology and a work schedule for the presentation of a final report to the relevant authorities,” the company added, without providing further details.
Bolivia’s $900m Bulo ammonia and urea plant in central Cochabamba department is expected to come on line later this year, while the construction of Petrobras’s Nitrogen Fertilizer Unit III (UFN III) at Tres Lagoas in central Brazil has been on hold for over a year following a contractual dispute with the plant’s constructor.
UFN III, which would use natural gas feedstock imported from Bolivia to produce 1.2m tonnes/year of urea, was 82% complete at the time of annulment.
cf industries, chs launch fertilizer venture
US fertilizer producer CF Industries and CHS, the nation’s top farmer- owned cooperative, announced on Monday that they have started a nitrogen fertilizer strategic venture and have begun delivery of urea and urea ammonium.
Under the agreement, first revealed in August, CHS has completed a $2.8bn equity investment in CF Industries’ nitrogen subsidiary to secure volumes for customers rather than build its own plant at a cost of $3bn.
CHS shelved plans for a facility in Spiritwood, North Dakota, that was scheduled to be in production by the first half of 2018. The facility would have produced more than 2,400 tonnes/day of ammonia, which would have been further converted into urea, urea ammonium nitrate (UAN) and diesel exhaust fluid (DEF).
Under the new investment, CHS will be entitled to semi-annual profit distributions from CF Nitrogen based on the volume of urea and UAN purchased under the supply agreement.
CHS is entitled to 1.1m tons (997,920 tonnes) of granular urea and 580,000 tons (526,176 tonnes) of UAN annually, which represents approximately 8.9% of CF’s total production capacity once its expansion projects are completed this year in Donaldsonville, Louisiana, and Port Neal, Iowa.
“We are pleased today to start our strategic venture with CHS, beginning the next chapter in a mutually beneficial long-term relationship. The venture will deliver attractive returns to CF shareholders as the equity investment helps support our longstanding capital allocation priorities and the supply agreement connects us to a reliable partner who will take rateable delivery of product across the year,” said CF president and CEO Tony Will.
CHS CEO Carl Casale echoed the positive outlook for the nitrogen venture and believes it will also add value for the cooperative’s members.
“This is an important day for CHS member-owners as we not only complete the single largest investment in our history, but more importantly establish long-term dependable nitrogen fertilizer supply, supply chain efficiency and opportunity for economic value,” said Casale.
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

Turkey’s Gubre Fabrikalari (Gubretas) is planning a raft of upgrades at Iranian subsidiary Razi Petrochemical Company this year following the lifting of international sanctions against Iran, Gubretas said on Monday.
Specific figures on how much would be invested in Razi – one of the largest fertilizer companies in Iran, which enjoys access to cheap natural gas feedstock – were not yet available, but Gubretas did disclose that it planned capital expenditure (capex) of Turkey lira (TRY) 310m (€96.9m) in 2016, two-thirds of which would be deployed outside Turkey.
Investment bank WOOD & Company said that although Razi is Gubretas’s main value driver, the “outlook on the Iranian operations is uncertain as the year-to-date fertilizer prices are averaging below our assumptions”.
Gubretas said it this year expected to generate TRY 4.044bn in revenues, compared to TRY 3.50bn last year; TRY 545m in earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) against 2015’s 421m and TRY 234m in net profit, following last year’s TRY 350m.
The liquid, solid and powder fertilizer producer also said it hoped that this year it would finalise a phosphate rock acquisition in North Africa.
Monday to issue a positive outlook for 2016 for its home market with the Russian government raising subsidies to farmers.
A fall of sales during 2015 of nitrogen-based fertilizers, down 1.4% year on year to 1.37m tonnes, was offset by a healthy increase in phosphate-based fertilizers at 5.28m tonnes, a rise of 12% compared to 2014.
The group’s total production of fertilizers rose during 2015 by 10.4% to 6.79m tonnes, with both sub products posting gains. PhosAgro produced 12.2% more phosphate-based fertilizers to 5.35m tonnes, while output of nitrogen-based fertilizers rose by 4% to 1.43m tonnes. “2015 was another challenging year in terms of the macroeconomic environment... Despite a difficult start to the year for Russian farmers, we managed to maintain sales volumes at the same level as 2014, with1.6 million tonnes supplied to domestic customers in 2015,” said PhosAgro’s CEO Andrey Guryev.
The company said during 2015 it had increased sales to Europe by 30% year on year to 1.25m tonnes while it said sales to India had risen “dramatically” to 700,000 tonnes during the year.
“Latin American market performance was weaker as a result of low soybean prices and economic challenges facing the region,” added Guryev.
phosagro 2015 sales volumes up 8.9%
PhosAgro’s total sales volumes in 2015 rose 8.9% year on year to 6.64m tonnes despite “challenging” conditions, prompting the fertilizers major on
fertoz set to advance canada project
Australian fertilizer developer Fertoz Limited said that during the upcoming quarter it plans to order or lease equipment for the

What are the main benefits
of switching to the ICIS Dashboard?
•Timely and flexible access to pricing data, news and analysis
•Integrated view of pricing and market data to support your commercial decisions
•Fully customisable view of market information that’s important to you
•Benchmark pricing data, related news and analysis on a single screen
•Export data and charts to integrate into your own systems analysis work
Access this report via the ICIS Dashboard
www.icis.com/dashboard
ICIS accepts no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please contact ICIS at sales.uk@icis.com.
The Market

In December the firm had announced the closing of a private placement totalling approximately $608,949, which it was intending to utilise for acquiring or renting the necessary equipment and services for advancement of work at Wapiti.
Australia-based Fertoz is a phosphate exploration and development company with a range of projects in Canada as well as in Australia. The Wapiti East project is located 850km (528 miles) northeast of Vancouver, British Columbia and covers 15,838 hectares.
It is the company’s North American flagship project and one of five company phosphate operations in British Columbia.
A scoping study for the project was completed in 2015 and was based on a staged open pit development with expectations it could reach 75,000 tonnes/year by 2018. If construction is completed this year, the firm is projected to produce 10,000 tonnes in 2016 and increase that to 35,000 tonnes by 2017.
Company officials have previously said the quality of the Wapiti East resources enhances the attractiveness of the potential production of phosphate, especially to the surging organic fertilizer market.
At 10% available phosphate, the site can provide better rates than is available in known phosphate producing areas like the US and Peru, where deposits typically only reveal 6-7% rates.
In additional updates on it Wapiti, the firm said that it plans to continue field trials, product certification and evaluation for the phosphate products that it will be creating from the project.
It also plans during the upcoming period to achieve increased progress on the 75,000 tonne/year small mine application that needs to be filed and approved for the next stage of development at the British Columbia site.
agrimin begins brine trials at sop site
Agrimin Limited has started brine evaporation trials at its Mackay sulphate of potash (SOP) project, the Australian fertilizer developer announced on Thursday.
The Perth-based firm said two initial trials will be conducted by Independent Metallurgical Operations (IMO) at its facility and that Agrimin’s technical team will work closely with IMO staff to carry out the trials over an estimated 75-day period.
Officials stated that the evaporation trials will utilise the 5,000 litre brine sample collected from the Mackay project and will produce potassium sulphate bearing salts for input into subsequent process testing efforts.
This test work will allow for further development of the process flow sheet for integration into the scoping study and that the final SOP
product will also be used by potential development and off-take partners for testing and verification purposes.
A detailed mass balance and process simulation study was completed in 2015 and showed that the Mackay project has appropriate characteristics for the production of SOP using conventional solar evaporation and processing techniques.
Agrimin is currently focused on the advancement of the MacKay project in Western Australia which covers 2,457 square kilometres and is a site where initial estimates have projected there is mineral resources of 22m tonnes present.
Agrimin has previously said it anticipated completion of the project’s scoping study during the Q1 period.
salt lake to start sop project study
Salt Lake Potash said that, based on positive test results at its Lake Wells potash project, it will initiate a scoping study and has begun discussions with potential engineering firms for that phase of the planned sulphate of potash (SOP) project in Western Australia.
The firm, which was operating as Wildhorse Energy Limited until December, had previously announced a maiden resource estimate of approximately 29m tonnes and said the trials recently concluded has confirmed brine at depth and permeable rock, which is thought would provide a substantial aquifer for extraction at the site.
Officials said the company has also commenced laboratory isothermal evaporation trials on bulk brine samples to define evaporation patterns and establish estimates for salting points.
An updated mineral resource estimate is underway which will incorporate the latest testing results and Salt Lake is planning to start pump testing of the aquifers which will measure the hydraulic properties present.
This past June the then-named Wildhorse closed its acquisition of Australia Salt Lake Potash, which provided the company with two large salt lake brine projects in Western Australia that were being developed to produce SOP for domestic and international fertilizer markets.
Officials have previously said one benefit of the acquisition of the Lake Wells site was that it has substantially high evaporation when compared to other brine potash projects like those located in the US within the state of Utah and also in western China.
All assessments in this report are made according to the published methodology, found at icis.com/compliance. The term “range” refers to the high and low prices gathered and verified in the week.

Quadrant House, The Quadrant, Sutton, Surrey. SM2 5AS. UK
Website: www.icis.com
ICIS Customer Support
For information about multiple subscriptions and licenses to this information product, or for permission to photocopy or redistribute individual reports, please call:
Pricing information from ICIS is also available via the Dashboard service. To find out more, visit www.icis.com/moreondashboard
The Market is published weekly by ICIS, Quadrant House, The Quadrant, Sutton, Surrey, SM2 5AS. United Kingdom. ICIS accept no liability for commercial decisions based on the content of this report. Unauthorised reproduction, onward transmission or copying of The Market in either its electronic or hard copy format is illegal. Should you require a licence or additional copies, please email us at the emails stated above.
ICIS is a member of the Reed Elsevier plc group. ©2016 ICIS



1  |  Data  |     |     |  2  |  Markets  |     |     |  3  |  News  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Section  |  Prices  |  2  |  Section  |  Nitrogen  |  4  |  Section  |  Plant problems deal impairment blow  |  
Recent sales  |  3  |  Phosphates  |  9  |  to Yara  |  20  |  
Freight  |  3  |  Ammonia  |  11  |  Pemex acquires Grupo Fertinal  |  21  |  
   |     |     |     |  Sulphur  |  16  |  PIC mulls shutting ferts operations  |  21  |  
   |     |     |     |  YPFB signs ferts deal with Petrobras 21  |  
   |     |     |     |  Potash  |  19  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



Phosphates  |  BRAZIL CFR PRICES  |     |     |     |     |  
■ Mosaic to reduce production in Q1  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
The producer will implement a plan of  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
rotating plant shutdowns which will  |     |  600  |  AS  |  MAP  |  Sulphur  |  Granular urea  |  
decrease production by 400,000 tonnes in  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
a bid to overcome a weakened short-term  |     |  500  |     |     |     |     |  
outlook for phosphate demand.  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
■ JPMC settles 1H price for rock  |     |  400  |     |     |     |     |  
deliveries to India  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
The producer settled the price for first  |  $/tonne  |     |     |     |     |     |  
half 2016 deliveries to Indian buyers for  |  300  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
phosphate rock 73-75 BPL at $120/tonne  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
FOB with 30 days’ credit for January-May  |     |  200  |     |     |     |     |  
loading, down from $130/tonne FOB.  |     |     |     |     |     |  
■ PhosAgro plans to increase sales of  |     |  100  |     |     |     |     |  
complex fertilizers, NPS  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Feb  |  Feb  |     |  Feb  |  Feb  |  
The producer will increase production  |     |  2013  |  2014  |     |  2015  |  2016  |  
capacities for complex fertilizers for  |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  1  |  



NITROGEN  |  4 February  |  28 January  |  
   |     |     |  
Urea prilled bulk  |     |     |  
   |     |     |  
Yuzhny FOB  |  190-195  |  185-200  |  
Romania FOB  |  203-207  |  205-210  |  
Baltic FOB  |  173-190  |  173-200  |  
Arab Gulf FOB  |  185-200  |  180-200  |  
SE Asia CFR  |  195-200  |  195-205  |  
   |     |     |  
NW Europe €pt FCA  |  225-230  |  225-235  |  
China FOB  |  190-200  |  190-195  |  
Urea granular bulk (spot)  |     |     |  
   |     |     |  
Arabian Gulf FOB  |  185-200  |  175-200  |  
Arab Gulf US netback FOB  |  190-215  |  193-203  |  
   |     |     |  
Iran FOB  |  180-185  |  175-180  |  
Yuzhny FOB  |  205-210  |  205-210  |  
SE Asia FOB  |  200-210  |  200-210  |  
China FOB  |  190-200  |  190-195  |  
SE Asia CFR  |  195-200  |  195-205  |  
   |     |     |  
Egypt FOB  |  215-222  |  224-231  |  
Algeria FOB  |  220-225  |  230-235  |  
North Africa FOB  |  215-225  |  224-235  |  
NW Europe €pt FCA  |  225-230  |  225-235  |  
Caribbean FOB  |  180-185  |  175-180  |  
US Gulf ps ton FOB  |  187-210  |  190-199  |  
US Gulf metric CFR equiv  |  202-227  |  205-215  |  
Brazil CFR  |  190-200  |  185-195  |  
Nitrates  |     |     |  
AN Baltic FOB bulk  |  180-185  |  180-185  |  
AN B Sea FOB bulk  |  180-185  |  180-185  |  
AN France € deld bulk  |  300-308  |  300-308  |  
AN UK FCA £ bagged  |  190-200  |  190-200  |  
AN FOB Nola ps ton  |  195-200  |  195-200  |  
CAN Germany € cif blk  |  222-230  |  222-230  |  
UAN France € FCA 30%  |  155-160  |  160-165  |  
UAN FOB B Sea 32%**  |  125-130  |  130-135  |  
UAN FOB Nola ps ton 32%  |  150-160  |  150-155  |  
UAN CFR ec US 32%  |  160-165  |  165-170  |  
Am. Sulphate bulk  |     |     |  
Black Sea FOB (white)  |  130-135  |  130-135  |  
Brazil CFR  |  120-140  |  120-140  |  
SE Asia CFR  |  118-128  |  120-130  |  
China FOB  |  102-108  |  105-110  |  
Natural Gas  |     |     |  
Nymex $/mmBtu  |  1.97  |  2.17  |  
NW Europe TTF $/mmBtu  |  4.19  |  4.08  |  
   |     |     |  
AMMONIA  |  4 February  |  28 January  |  
Yuzhny FOB  |  270-280  |  270-280  |  
Arabian Gulf FOB  |  290-300  |  300-310  |  
Iran FOB  |  290-300  |  300-310  |  
Caribbean FOB  |  270-280  |  270-280  |  
US Gulf CFR  |  313-315  |  313-315  |  
Tampa CFR  |  310  |  310  |  
NW Europe CFR duty unpaid  |  320-330  |  320-330  |  
North Africa CFR  |  300-310  |  300-310  |  
India CFR  |  330-340  |  340-350  |  
Taiwan CFR  |  370-380  |  380-390  |  
Korea CFR  |  347-385  |  385-395  |  



PHOSPHATES  |  4 February  |  28 January  |  
   |     |     |  
DAP bulk  |     |     |  
   |     |     |  
US Gulf FOB  |  375-380  |  375-380  |  
Nola ps ton FOB barge  |  312-326  |  315-330  |  
North Africa FOB  |  380-400  |  380-420  |  
Saudi Arabia FOB  |  365-375  |  380-395  |  
Baltic FOB  |  350-380  |  350-380  |  
   |     |     |  
China FOB  |  365-370  |  370-375  |  
Pakistan CFR  |  390-400  |  410-415  |  
   |     |     |  
Benelux FCA €  |  357-384  |  390-395  |  
MAP bulk  |     |     |  
Baltic Sea FOB  |  335-350  |  350-380  |  
Brazil CFR sight  |  320-335  |  335-340  |  
TSP bulk  |     |     |  
North Africa FOB  |  280-320  |  280-320  |  
NPK bulk  |     |     |  
Russia 16.16.16 FOB  |  340-360  |  340-360  |  
China 16.16.16 CFR  |  360-365  |  360-365  |  
Phos Acid P2O5 fert grade  |     |     |  
N Africa FOB  |  655-760  |  655-760  |  
NW Europe CFR  |  840-940  |  840-940  |  
India CFR cash  |  715  |  715  |  
Phosphate Rock  |     |     |  
Morocco 70-72 BPL FOB  |  120-145  |  120-145  |  
India CFR  |  75-140  |  75-140  |  
   |     |     |  
POTASH  |  4 February  |  28 January  |  
MOP bulk  |     |     |  
Vancouver standard FOB  |  245-300  |  250-300  |  
Vancouver gran FOB  |  230-280  |  250-305  |  
Israel/Jordan standard FOB  |  245-300  |  250-300  |  
Baltic standard FOB  |  245-300  |  250-300  |  
China CFR  |  315  |  315  |  
SE Asia CFR  |  270-290  |  275-295  |  
Brazil gran CFR  |  240-255  |  260-270  |  
NW Europe € gran CIF  |  275-300  |  275-300  |  
SOP bulk  |     |     |  
NW Europe € FOB  |  450-490  |  450-490  |  
   |     |     |  
SULPHUR  |  4 February  |  28 January  |  
Vancouver FOB (spot/contract)  |  95-100  |  106-112  |  
Middle East FOB  |  85-115  |  85-122  |  
Mediterranean CFR spot  |  85-105  |  115-120  |  
North Africa CFR contract  |  112-128  |  112-128  |  
China CFR  |  85-95  |  95-105  |  
India CFR  |  108-115  |  115-120  |  
Black Sea FOB  |  69-97  |  69-97  |  
Brazil CFR  |  110-115  |  122-130  |  
Liquid  |     |     |  
Tampa CFR lton  |  95  |  95  |  
Benelux delivered  |  132-143  |  137-148  |  
** low end dutiable product  |     |     |  
   |     |     |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  2  |  



Product  |  Origin  |  Seller  |  Buyer  |  Destination  |  ‘000t  |  $pt  |     |  Ship  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Urea - prilled  |  China?  |  Golden Barley  |  NAFAS  |  Malaysia  |  6  |  199  |  CFR  |  Feb/March  |  
Urea - granular  |  Egypt  |  OCI/EFC?  |  Trader  |     |  20  |  215  |  FOB  |  February  |  
   |  Egypt  |  OCI/EFC?  |  Trader  |     |  4-5  |  215  |  FOB  |  February  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Egypt  |  OCI/EFC  |     |  Europe  |  3-5  |  222  |  FOB  |  February  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Kuwait  |  PIC  |  Helm  |  Europe  |  25-30  |  200  |  FOB  |  Feb/March  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  China?  |  Dreymoor  |  Pungnong  |  Korea  |  5  |  197  |  CFR  |  February  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  AG?  |  Liven  |  Sak Siam  |  Thailand  |  20-25  |  197  |  CFR  |  Feb/March  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
UAN  |  US  |  Nitron  |  Bunge  |  Argentina  |  25  |  170  |  CFR  |  February  |  
DAP  |  Australia  |  Quantum  |  United Agro  |  Pakistan  |  30  |  392  |  CFR  |  February  |  
   |  China  |  Golden Barley  |  NAFAS  |  Malaysia  |  4  |  low-370s CFR  |     |  
MAP  |  Saudi Arabia  |  Indagro  |  multiple buyers  |  Brazil  |  30  |  330-340 CFR  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Russia  |     |  Heringer  |  Brazil  |     |  325  |  CFR  |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
DAP/MAP  |  Russia  |  Nitron  |     |  Argentina  |  5  |  335  |  CFR  |  February  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Saudi Arabia  |  Ma’aden  |     |  Australia  |  30-40  |  Formula  |  February  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
Ammonia  |  Yuzhny  |  Koch  |  Namhae  |  Korea  |  10-13  |  Above 347 CFR  |  February  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Indonesia  |  Petrokimia Gresik  |  CJ  |  Indonesia  |  6  |  368  |  CFR  |  February  |  
   |  Australia  |  Yara  |  Namhae  |  Korea  |  15  |  347  |  CFR  |  February  |  
Sulphur  |  US Gulf  |     |  Vale  |  New Caledonia  |  50  |  100  |  FOB  |  March  |  
   |  Turkey  |  Tupras  |  Bagfas  |  Turkey  |  5  |  100  |  CFR  |  February  |  



Route  |  Product  |  ’000 tonnes  |  $/tonne  |  
Yuzhny-WC India  |     |     |  15-18  |  
Urea  |  35-45  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Riga-Brazil  |  Urea  |  25-30  |  10-13  |  
   |     |     |     |  
AG- US Gulf  |  Urea  |  35-45  |  11-13  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Egypt-French Bay  |  Urea  |  6-8  |  15-20  |  
   |     |     |     |  
USG-WC India  |  DAP  |  55-65  |  14-16  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Morocco-Brazil  |  MAP  |  25-30  |  6-8  |  
USG-Brazil  |  DAP  |  25-30  |  9-11  |  
Baltic-Brazil  |  MOP  |  25-35  |  11-13  |  
Baltic-China  |  MOP  |  55-65  |  14-16  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Vancouver-Brazil  |  MOP/Sul  |  45-50  |  13-15  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Vancouver-China  |  Sul/MOP  |  50-65  |  6-8  |  
   |     |     |     |  
AG-WC India  |  Sulphur  |  15-20  |  8-10  |  
   |     |     |     |  
AG-China  |  Sulphur  |  25-30  |  8-10  |  
   |     |     |     |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  3  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  4  |  



Urea  |  FOB Egypt, $/tonne  |  
   |     |     |  
   |  Buyers  |  Sellers  |  
   |     |     |  
February  |  205  |  215  |  
   |     |     |  
March  |  205  |  215  |  



Urea  |  FOB Nola $/short ton  |  FOB Yuzhny  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Buyers  |  Sellers  |  Buyers  |  Sellers  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
February  |  202  |  205  |  190  |  195  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
March  |  204  |  206  |  190  |  195  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
April  |  202  |  206  |  190  |  195  |  
   |     |  
Direct Hedge Fertilizer Swaps Price Indications,  |     |  
4 february 2016  |     |     |     |     |  
UAN  |  FOB Nola $/short ton  |  FOT Rouen €/tonne  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Buyers  |  Sellers  |  Buyers  |  Sellers  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
February  |  138  |  142  |  140  |  144  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
March  |  138  |  142  |  140  |  144  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
April  |  138  |  142  |  140  |  144  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  5  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  6  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  7  |  



   |  Discharge  |  Quantity  |     |     |  
Load Port  |  port  |  ('000 tonnes)  |  Charterer  |  Laycan  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
China  |  Stockton  |  30  |  Navig8 Azotic  |  18-28 Jan  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Klaipeda  |  Europe  |  15  |     |  4-10 February  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Klaipeda  |  Europe  |  10-15  |     |  1H Feb  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Damietta  |  Spanish Med  |  4-10  |     |  30 Jan-3 Feb  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  US east coast  |     |     |     |  
Damietta  |  / US Gulf or  |  25  |  Enquiry  |  30 Jan-3 Feb  |  
   |  Rouen  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Terneuzen  |  Rouen  |  5  |  Enquiry  |  1H February  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
Varna  |  Yuzhny  |  2-3  |     |  1H February  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  8  |  



   |  600  |     |     |     |  
   |  550  |     |     |     |  
   |  500  |     |     |     |  
$/tonne  |  450  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  
   |  400  |     |     |     |  
   |  350  |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |  FON North Africa  |     |  
   |  300  |     |  FOB USG  |     |  
   |     |     |     |  
   |  Jun  |  Jun  |  Jun  |  Feb  |  
   |  2012  |  2013  |  2014  |  2016  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  9  |  



DAP  |  FOB Tampa  |  FOB Nola $/short ton  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
   |  Buyers  |  Sellers  |  Buyers  |  Sellers  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
February  |  340  |  360  |  325  |  330  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
March  |  340  |  360  |  325  |  332  |  
April  |  340  |  360  |  -  |  -  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  10  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  11  |  



   |  800  |     |  
   |  700  |     |  
   |  600  |     |  
$/tonne  |  500  |     |  
   |     |  
   |  400  |     |  
   |  300  |     |  
   |     |  Yuzhny FOB  |  
   |  200  |  Arabian Gulf FOB  |  
   |     |  
   |  Jan  |  Feb  |  
   |  2010  |  2016  |  



Koch/Korea  |  40  |  Clipper Orion  |  2  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Ameropa/Belgium  |  23.4  |  Gas Cobia  |  5  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Ameropa/TBC  |  23.4  |  Gas Snapper  |  8-10  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Trammo/Turkey + Israel  |  15  |  Marycam Swan  |  11-12  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Ameropa/Morocco  |  25.3  |  Odin  |  12  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Ameropa/Belgium  |  23.4  |  Gas Manta  |  13-17  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Ameropa/Tunisia  |  24.5  |  Solaro  |  20-21  |  
Ameropa/Turkey?  |  23.4  |  Gas Cobia?  |  22-27  |  
   |     |     |     |  
NF Trading/Morocco  |  23.4  |  Gaschem Stade  |  23-28  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Ameropa/TBC  |  23.4  |  Gas Grouper  |  28-29  |  
   |     |     |     |  
   |  230.2  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  



Trammo/Spain+Israel  |  15  |  Marycam Swan  |  4  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Ameropa/Belgium  |  25.3  |  Odin  |  8  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Trammo/Morocco  |  23.4  |  SCF Tobolsk  |  17  |  
Ameropa/Turkey  |  23.4  |  Gas Snapper  |  20  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Ameropa/Tunisia  |  15  |  Navigator Grace  |  21  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Trammo/Turkey  |  15  |  Marycam Swan  |  26  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Trammo/Turkey  |  23.4  |  Sanko Innovator  |  27  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Ameropa/India  |  40  |  Clipper Mars  |  29  |  
   |     |     |     |  
IFFCO/India  |  23.3  |  Gas Grouper  |  31  |  
   |     |     |     |  
   |  203.9  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  12  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  13  |  



Mitsui/Indonesia  |  7  |  Gaz Serenity  |  15 February  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Trammo/Indonesia  |  23.4  |  TBN  |  20-25 February  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Koch/Yuzhny  |  27-30  |  Clipper Orion  |  1-4 March  |  
Namhae  |     |     |     |  
Mitsubishi/Indonesia  |  9.5  |  SCF Tomsk  |  4 February  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Trammo/Arab Gulf  |  10  |  Brussels  |  14 February  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Mitsubishi/Arab Gulf  |  15  |  Gas Quantum  |  14 February  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Yara/Australia  |  15  |  Viking River  |  1 March  |  
   |     |     |     |  
Koch/Yuzhny  |  10-13  |  Clipper Orion  |  1-4 March  |  
   |     |     |     |  



Raintrade/Iran  |  13  |  Gas Master  |  4 February  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Mitsui/Arabian Gulf  |  6.4  |  Al-Jabirah  |  Late February  |     |     |  
Mitsui/Indonesia  |  2  |  TBN  |  Late February  |     |     |  
TFC  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
SABIC/Arabian Gulf  |  17  |  Al-Jabirah  |  1-7 March  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Formosa  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Yara/Australia  |  15  |  Viking River  |  5 February  |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
Mitsubishi/TBC  |  15  |  TBN  |  March  |     |     |  
   |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  14  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  15  |  



   |  200  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |  182  |     |     |     |     |  
   |  150  |  164  |     |     |     |     |  
Lafan  |     |     |     |  151  |     |  
   |     |     |  149  |     |  
   |  145  |     |     |     |  
   |  139  |  141  |     |     |  
Ras  |     |     |     |     |  129  |  
   |     |     |     |  133  |  
   |     |     |     |  124  |  
FOB  |  100  |     |     |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |  119  |  
   |     |     |     |     |  
$/tonne  |     |     |     |     |  103  |  89  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  50  |     |     |     |     |     |  
   |  0  |     |     |     |     |     |  



   |  200  |     |  
   |  180  |     |  
   |  175  |     |  
   |  150  |     |  
Ruwais  |     |  150  |  
   |  145  |  
   |     |  
FOB  |  140  |  140  |  
100  |     |  
$/tonne  |     |     |  
   |  50  |     |  
   |  0  |     |  



155  |     |  
135  |  130  |  
   |  125  |  
   |  122  |  
   |  105  |  
   |  115  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  16  |  



   |  4 Feb  |  28 Jan  |  
   |     |     |  
Fangcheng  |  490  |  470  |  
   |     |     |  
Zhanjiang  |  100  |  160  |  
   |     |     |  
Beihai  |  150  |  150  |  
   |     |     |  
Zhenjiang  |  150  |  120  |  
   |     |     |  
Nantong  |  440  |  370  |  
Qingdao  |  58  |  60  |  
Rizhao  |  8  |  8  |  
Longkou  |  19  |  17  |  
   |     |     |  
Tianjin  |  0  |  0  |  
   |     |     |  
Total  |  1415  |  1355  |  
   |     |     |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  17  |  



   |  200  |     |  
   |  175  |     |  
   |  150  |     |  
$/tonne  |  125  |     |  
   |     |  
   |  100  |     |  
   |     |  CFR China  |  
   |  75  |  FOB Vancouver  |  
   |     |  
   |  Feb  |  Feb  |  
   |  2015  |  2016  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  18  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  19  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  20  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  21  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  22  |  



Asia & Middle East  |  +65  |  6588 3955  |  
Europe & Africa  |  +44  |  20  |  8652 3335  |  
toll free US & Canada  |  +1  |  888 525 3255  |  
or Americas  |  +1  |  713 525 2613  |  
csc@icis.com  |     |     |     |  



Singapore  |  +65 678 8828  |  
   |  sales.ap@icis.com  |  
London  |  +44 20 8652 3335  |  
   |  sales.uk@icis.com  |  
Houston  |  +1 713 525 2600  |  
   |  sales.us@icis.com  |  



  |  Managing Editor  |     |  Kate Wilcock  |  +44 20 8652 4518  |  
  |  Rebecca Clarke  |  +44 20 8652 3177  |     |  kate.wilcock@icis.com  |  
  |  rebecca.clarke@icis.com  |     |     |  
  |  London  |     |  Houston  |     |  
  |     |  Mark Milam  |  +1 713 525 2637  |  
  |  Richard Ewing  |  +44 20 8652 8521  |  
  |     |  mark.milam@icis.com  |  
  |     |  richard.ewing@icis.com  |     |  
  |     |     |     |  
  |  Julia Meehan  |  +44 20 8652 2264  |     |     |  
  |     |  julia.meehan@icis.com  |     |     |  
  |  Deepika Thapliyal  |  +44 20 8652 3332  |     |     |  
  |  deepika.thapliyal@icis.com  |     |     |  



Sylvia Traganida  |  +44 20 8652 2266  |  
sylvia.traganida@icis.com  |  



The Market | 4 February 2016 | www.icis.com  |  23  |  



