28 April | 2015
SIX MONTH PRICE FORECASTS
FORECASTS
UREA
Chinese resistance to low prices triggers early rebound in granular
Urea values are forecast to recover over the next six months with granular prices supported by Chinese resistance to low netbacks (see Urea Actual and Six Month Price Forecast Table). Values for prills appear less likely to surge in line with the premium grade, and the duration of the rebound remains questionable due to mounting inventories perceived over the coming months unless Chinese producers elect to extend their current stand on pricing for prilled product.
Fertilizer Week’s April Urea Short Term Forecast statement that the nosedive in urea pricing occurred early but was unlikely to last long proved timely. Middle East granular values surged this week via a forward sale by Fertil at $285/mt FOB, up by more than $40/mt on the floor evident in March sales of granular urea to Brazil via traders holding long-term contracts. The latest deal implies delivered values into Brazil close to $310/mt CFR versus the March floor around an even $260/mt CFR.
Similarly, trades in barges at New Orleans moved up to $320/st FOB equivalent, but these were linked to barges previously on tow or already arrived at key distribution points. Supply hang ups that begin in the US Gulf and reach through the upper Mississippi River system have driven this continued spike in US granular urea prices. Some cargoes from the Middle East have been delayed, and movement out of the US Gulf to inland markets was slowed substantially by a shortage of tows for barges and uncooperative weather in places. A full week was added to the normal time it took to unload some cargoes to barges and move material north over the last month. Consequently, barges already on their way north were yielding up to a $20/st premium over barges in the Gulf for prompt load dates.
The supply tie ups are expected to subside substantially by the second half of May, but pricing near to $300/st FOB New Orleans should continue for barges well placed to benefit from the regional shortfall.
Overall US urea demand is roughly in line with expectations for corn, spring wheat, rice, cotton and
other crops. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the potential for urea to replace ammonia for some nitrogen applications shrank substantially in the last week to 10 days. A modest decline in ammonia pricing combined with higher urea costs in the Midwest and Northern Plains markets has reversed the prior ratio that favoured urea and returned ammonia to its usual role as the cheapest form of nitrogen available to farmers.
The urea market will remain supply-driven throughout the forecast period. Egyptian imports of LNG are set to trigger increased exports, while capacity from Indonesia (Kaltim V) and Saudi Arabia (Safco V) is maintained for granular urea despite recent issues in the start-up phase for both units. Production from the Oman/Algerian joint venture to be sold for export is still expected to hit the market by the beginning of Q3 although export license issues such as those experienced by Sorfert could delay the process. Sorfert exports have been maintained at an average of 100,000 mt/month.
Declining natural gas and coal costs are set to impact global urea prices in the coming months, but higher electricity rates in effect from April 20 will raise direct costs for Chinese mainstream producers by an estimated RMB 80- 100/mt ($13-16/mt) for anthracite-based units and RMB 30- 60/mt ($5-9/mt) for bituminous-based units.
The issue of a VAT at 13% being added on all Chinese fertilizer sales, including exports, is still pending, but the possible re-introduction has not been taken into account when defining export values through October.
Indian demand through 2015 beyond the relatively limited 510,000 mt contracted in the April 10 STC session is set to emerge via tenders in May and beyond. The requirement can be covered from ample Chinese availability with ease, but is price sensitive given the change in cost factors and intervention by the China Nitrogen Fertilizer Industry Association (CNFIA) which may curtail exports in Q2.
PHOSPHATES
India sales move benchmarks down but should set floor
The essence of this month's report remains unchanged from the April Forecast with a similar outlook and no significant difference to the price trend.
The only real difference to the price trend since the last forecast derives from a slightly lower actual price for April moving forward. The last report forecast an April price of $470/mt FOB Tampa but the actual price was $5/mt lower. The reason for this was the earlier-than-anticipated sales by Mosaic to India which brought down the netback into the mid $450s/mt FOB Tampa.
Although expected to start its shipping programme to India in Q2, the slow start to the Brazilian season and the favourable returns on Indian business prompted Mosaic to sell 200,000 mt a month or so earlier than expected. Fertilizer Week had forecast the Tampa price to dip in May/June due to Mosaic's anticipated sales into India, a move that tends to bring down the average price in Tampa due to the usual cap on Indian delivered prices.
A combination of strong Indian demand and decent netbacks, the prolonged start to the Brazilian season and a need by Russian producers to generate cashflow has prompted substantial sales of both US and Russian DAP into India at competitive prices. Such a baseload of export business already sold for Q2 has placed both of these suppliers, Mosaic and PhosAgro, in a stronger position to start their respective Brazilian campaigns and has already had the effect of moving Russian prices higher for May/June business.
Rather than seeing a gentle decline through April/May and into early June as forecast in the last report, we are therefore now seeing a price incline moving upwards as talk of a tighter market becomes more of a reality. Nevertheless, the peak of the market remains unchanged with June H2/July/August H1 likely to see the highest prices during the next six months, supported by robust and simultaneous demand from the Indian sub-continent and Brazil/Argentina.
As seasonal demand in Brazil starts to tail off from September and much of the Indian Rabi demand has been covered, the market may come under pressure once again. Although Chinese producers will be turning their attention towards their own domestic market from end August, we must note the additional capacity in Morocco with the start of the JPH-1 unit in Q2 and the second unit due onstream by the end of
Q3/ Q4. Although OCP is unlikely to run all capacity at maximum and is clear about maintaining granulation levels in line with demand, the fact that a further 2 million mt capacity will be on the market by the end of the year cannot be ignored.
However, the greatest downside risk to this market over the next six months will come from India if the preliminary forecast from the IMD comes to fruition with a second consecutive "below normal" monsoon. As yet the negative forecast issued at the end of April has not halted the surge in buying interest currently emanating from India, in turn prompted by lower opening stocks at the start of 2015/16. Once the first tranche of Kharif demand has been covered, expected soon with quantities booked to date approaching 2 million mt, importers may become a little more cautious until there is further clarity on the eventual progression of the monsoon. Last year's late rains caused a delay in the start of the Indian buying campaign and overall imports, although greater than 2013/14 at 3.8 million mt, remained some 2 million mt below the five-year average.
The renewed weakness in the rupee is also of concern with a decline from INR 62 to 63 on a delivered price of $480/mt CFR equating to almost $8/mt. Therefore we can expect Indian importers to maintain pressure on the price, particularly heading towards the period of maximum Chinese export availability, May- August. The MRP is expected to stay at or above INR 23,500/mt, which with the rupee at INR 63, equates to a
breakeven point in the high $480s/mt CFR, but to ensure some margin, importers will want a price sub $480/mt CFR and lower again if the rupee weakens further. The price limitations in India will continue to keep a lid on average global prices going forward despite an expected strengthening in Brazilian delivered prices as the market starts moving.
Softer raw material prices through the six- month period will give suppliers more leeway should these negative factors start to bear down on price. Weaker currencies in Russia and even China have given suppliers the flexibility to lower prices where
necessary. Although the predicted price range for Chinese DAP is likely to remain above $450/mt FOB, at current sulphur prices the larger
Chinese producers could accept prices nearer $400/mt FOB China and still remain above cost.
As well on the bearish side, the US may have greater than expected DAP volumes to export during Q2 and Q3 as low crop values are cutting into demand, and greater than normal carryover throughout the supply chain appears likely as the spring comes to an end.
The upside to the DAP market through Q2/Q3 will be provided by a potential surge in Brazilian demand with large volume seasonal requirements condensed into the May-September H1 shipping period. Coming later than last year but coinciding with other major Asian import demand, could tighten the market over the short term. As such we are most likely to see a reversal in the two-tier market with higher prices seen in Brazil and India remaining capped at lower levels, a similar trend to last year.
To summarise, the market is looking stable-firm with solid demand expected from the major import markets through the rest of Q2 and much of Q3. Average prices although supported by higher prices in Brazil, will be tempered by Indian delivered values and as such the price range will be limited through much of the forecast period.
SULPHUR
Forecast little changed as new capacity looms
Fertilizer Week’s May short term forecast (STF) for sulphur is little changed from the previous month’s iteration, as most market indicators and expectations of supply and demand remain at similar levels to a month ago.
As previously forecast, the Middle East FOB spot price benchmark for sulphur declined further in April, with the average for the month at $151/mt FOB after prices came under considerable pressure over the course of the month.
The weakness is expected to persist with some further price declines possible before the market stabilises in May. Going into the second half of the year, prices are likely to be pressured downwards, mainly because of new capacity scheduled to come onstream.
Middle East FOB prices are expected to average around $150/mt FOB in May. Both Tasweeq and Adnoc have yet to announce their prices for May, but most in the market expect slight declines from these players. Aramco Trading posted $140/mt FOB for its May price, $25/mt below its April level, but in line with current FOB levels and other Middle Eastern sellers’ official April prices. With the Chinese market stabilising and freight rates relatively low, it seems that Middle Eastern FOB levels in the low $140s/mt FOB should be achievable now, though it remains to be seen how soon any noteworthy increase in prices may happen, if at all.
Recent spot demand has been weak from all regions, as buyers have had limited requirements and have been waiting for the market to reach a bottom. Buying has recently picked up somewhat, but market participants believe some of the activity is speculative.
Nonetheless, most would agree that prices are unlikely to fall much further, if at all. But no great
resurgence in prices seems imminent either, as the spectre of oversupply continues to hang over the market.
The scale and rate of the price recovery will largely be determined by how quickly and to what extent Chinese buyers return to the market for imported tonnes, as thus far the large phosphate producers have continued to hold off buying.
Trade data showed that China imported 1.12 million mt of sulphur in January, their highest monthly total since March 2013. Although February imports were down 7% year on year at 793,658 mt, they were expected to be somewhat lower than usual because of the Spring Festival occurring in late February, leaving the market and ports mostly inactive for much of the second half of the month. However, March data showed a 36.3% year-on-year fall to 652,318 mt, the lowest monthly total since August 2013.
Although key phosphate producers are believed to be comfortable with stocks for now, they will likely need to engage in some stockbuilding if they wish to take advantage of demand for phosphate exports. Phosphate plant turnarounds in China will temper any price recovery.
The major factor likely to determine prices over the STF period and beyond is the startup of the Shah project in the UAE. Delays in its commissioning previously made sellers more confident that the market would remain tight, and some Middle Eastern sellers claim they are fully committed through May. Shah represents the largest of the capacity increases forecast for this year, and indeed for the next five years, and is expected to be a key cause of the overall supply-demand balance moving from short to long by end-2015. Full commissioning of Shah is expected by the end of Q2. Other projects such as Barzan in Qatar, which is expected to commission in June/July, will also add to total output.
In addition, sellers such as Russia are returning to the market in the Northern Hemisphere’s spring. Russian sales were hindered by rail congestion and the usual issues with river access during winter months. Although river navigation resumed at the beginning of April, low water levels have limited the scale of shipments, increasing the backlog of Russian cargoes.
The increased supply from the Middle East and elsewhere, combined with US buyers’ attempts to diversify their consumption away from Canadian and domestic suppliers, is still expected to lead to a reduction in outlets for sulphur from Vancouver, adding to pressure for lower prices on Canadian exports and/or increase stockpiles in the coming months, and stockpiles have already been increasing in recent months. As Middle Eastern sellers benefit from a low export cost, the new supply will be able to sell at the margin, leaving sellers in Canada and most other regions struggling to compete with delivered prices of sulphur from the Middle East. Vancouver FOB spot prices are therefore likely to maintain a discount to Middle East FOBs, while those who can’t compete will stockpile further.
Meanwhile, US producers have continued increasing their international sales, with particularly strong sales to Morocco recently, displacing some more traditional sources of imports. Should prices remain sufficiently attractive, US companies are likely to export even more and potentially further displace other sellers.
SULPHURIC ACID
Outlook remains steady but shocks could lead to spikes
The sulphuric acid price forecast for May remained relatively unchanged from the previous month’s iteration, with global prices expected to change little throughout the forecast period.
Prices for both Northwest Europe and Chile are forecast to remain stable in the early months of the forecast period before gradually decreasing slightly over the remainder of the forecast.
Having already decreased slightly from an actual assessed average of $33/mt FOB in November and December to $32/mt FOB in January and $31/mt FOB in February, March, and April, Northwest European FOB spot prices are expected gradually to fall to $26/mt FOB by October.
Chilean CFR spot levels have remained steady at a notional assessment of $85/mt FOB for around half a year as spot activity has been lacking, and where it has been reported it has been within the assessed range. These prices are also forecast to inch down in H2, reaching $82/mt FOB by August.
Market participants had been expecting some Chilean spot demand in Q2 following the lack of enquiry in
Q1. However, most buyers’ requirements for H1 are believed to have been met after contract settlements for 2015 were reached in December 2014. Some Chilean demand has also been satisfied by new supply from Mexico, namely the Boleo sulphur burner. In addition, the recent floods have led to a backlog of product in tanks at ports needing to be moved to plants, and this may delay any potential spot demand, though most believe that any market impact from this is likely to be small.
With contractual prices around $80/mt CFR, buyers will not be willing to pay much higher spot prices in the near term unless a buyer has an essential prompt requirement. Those who do have a prompt requirement may find themselves paying relatively high prices given a lack of Asian smelter acid.
Supply from Asian producers remains tight, and is likely to remain so to H2, at least. Q1 turnarounds at Mitsubishi’s Naoshima smelter, LS Nikko’s Onsan smelter, and Toho Zinc’s Onahama have limited sellers’ spot availability, and Q2 shutdowns at Korea Zinc and Glencore’s PASAR smelter in the Philippines will keep the market constricted.
The tightness led to some buyers having to source sulphur-burnt product from China in March as East Asian smelters have not had smelter acid tonnes for spot sales. But such business has not been evident in April, as prompt requirements from India have diminished.
However, into H2 the situation may ease somewhat. Although PASAR is set to be down for much of Q2, and this may lead to the marginal price being slightly higher than if PASAR kept producing, increased absence of a relatively small producer that has been running at low rates for the past year is unlikely to have a dramatic effect on availability. In addition, the smelter is understood to be incorporating a production
expansion, although this is unlikely to materially affect traded volumes from the plant until 2016. However, any extra tonnes from the plant will end up on the market, as it is expected to be some time before the Philphos plant is back up. There is thus widespread concern in the market over when, and by how much, PASAR’s acid production will increase.
Chinese demand for imported sulphuric acid has been much weaker thus far in 2015 than the previous year, and is likely to remain at a similar level given current prices.
Overall, the upside risk to the Chilean CFR forecast is greater than the downside risk because of the tight availability.
European FOB levels are expected to undergo some downward pressure, but no return to the low FOB prices of H1 2014 is expected, as supply in this region is also tight.
Price increases from late H1 2014 onwards from the lows of $0-5/mt FOB seen at the beginning of the year were driven by some production issues at European smelters and by stronger-than- expected demand. Despite persistent macroeconomic concerns, demand from European buyers was firm in 2014. In addition, strong spot demand
from Morocco combined with improved Brazilian demand to tighten the market in H2 2014.
But these demand sources will not necessarily be as strong in 2015, despite a relatively firm start to the year.
Moroccan demand for spot sulphuric acid has declined and is expected to decline further over the next few months, with the buyer currently limiting itself to contractual volumes. OCP’s new 1.25 million mt/year sulphuric acid unit started in April. While the company’s phosphate plants are being ramped up, there will be surplus acid available for use in OCP's other facilities. Weaker sulphur prices also make the buyer less willing to pay higher prices for acid. Thus, although OCP has remained an important source of demand so far this year, it is unlikely to be very active in sulphuric acid over the next few months, and its overall sulphuric acid imports for 2015 are likely to be lower than last year.
Brazil’s annual imports were stable in 2014 following a weak December, and they remained well below the year before that. The January and February figures for 2015 were up considerably year on year, but at least some of this demand was met by Mexican supply, leaving Europeans waiting for enquiries. March imports dropped 59% on the year, but this was not enough to offset the earlier increases, leaving Q1 imports double those of Q1 2014.
Recent spot business to Brazil has remained in the $80s/mt CFR, despite insistence by some that European tightness should push them higher.
Demand for contractual volumes from European buyers remains strong, and this means that sellers are not under tremendous pressure to shift tonnes at this stage. Indeed, European contract prices are widely expected to remain stable from Q1 to Q2, and some sellers believe they can achieve an increase.
But industrial demand in Europe remains a source of much uncertainty, and the macro economy could see further recovery or greater weakness, though the current outlook does not offer much hope for imminent recovery, and European demand is likely to be underwhelming.
Meanwhile, Dundee Precious Metals’ sulphuric acid plant at its copper smelter in Tsumeb, Namibia, is currently expected to begin running in June. CRU forecasts sulphuric acid supply from the plant of around 140,000 mt in 2015, with this increasing to 310,000 mt/year from 2016.
Dundee has a supply agreement with Rössing Uranium for the annual purchase of 225,000 t/y of sulphuric acid, and other supply agreements are under negotiation with Weatherly International and Protea Chemicals. The plant will therefore remove the requirement for Rössing to import acid from 2017, leaving one fewer outlet for European exporters.
Jennifer Willis-Jones, Editor- Global
Tel: +44 207 903 2196
Email: jennifer. willis-jones@crugroup.com
Sarah Marlow, Editor - Global
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2277
Email: sarah.marlow@crugroup.com
Brendan Daly, Editor - Global
Tel: + 44 (0) 20 7903 2185
Email: brendan.daly@crugroup.com
Ben Farey, Editor in Chief
Direct Tel: +44 (0) 207 903 2015
Mobile: +44 (0) 7885557034
Email: ben.farey@crugroup.com
Subscriptions & Customer Services
Tel: +44 (0)20 7903 2146
Email: customer.services@crugroup.com
Legal Copyright Notice © 2015 CRU International Ltd
Please note: Access to and use of this product are restricted by copyright and other law to named authorised users of companies with valid licences to do so. Any other use is prohibited. The copyright of this product is held by CRU International Ltd. It is a breach of law to forward/share this product or any of its contents, including but not limited to, single prices to any person, whether in your company or otherwise, unless that person is an authorised user under a valid licence.
The commission of any unauthorised act in relation to this product may result in civil or criminal actions.
Disclaimer:
While all reasonable efforts are taken to ensure the reliability of the fertilizer pricing and freight pricing data, FW does not guarantee its accuracy or take liability for the results obtained by using the data.
Using FW prices in contracts: Many subscribers to Fertilizer Week use Fertilizer Week benchmark prices in their contracts. When both sides in a business arrangement agree in advance to use a set of prices it creates more certainty and saves everyone time – as long as the prices can be relied upon. Fertilizer Week publishes a regularly updated methodology document with detailed definitions of every price we publish. By understanding how we calculate our prices, you will be able to build your own scenarios based on these prices
For more detail on methodology view our Pricing Methodology Guide
CRU International Ltd. Registered in England No 940750.
Registered Office: Charles House, 108-110 Finchley Road, London, NW3 5JJ.
Tel: + 44 20 7903 2000 Fax: +44 20 7837 0976
www.crugroup.com



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 1  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 2  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 3  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 4  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 5  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 6  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 7  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 8  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 9  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 10  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 11  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 12  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 13  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 14  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 15  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 16  |  



www.crugroup.com  |  Price Forecast | 17  |  



