®
A Bloomberg BNA Business
Mosaic announces phosphate production curtailments
The Mosaic Co., citing current crop nutrient market conditions, on Feb. 3 an- nounced that it will reduce production in its Phosphates business. The company intends to reduce production by up to 400,000 mt, with rotating plant shutdowns in the first quarter of 2016.
“With the recent price volatility and decline in raw material costs, buyers appear to be delaying purchases. This is lengthening the seasonal period of weak demand,” said Rick McLellan, senior vice president, commercial. “Today’s crop nutrient prices, including phosphates, are attractive to farmers globally, and we expect a strong demand response after this seasonally slow period.”
“The long-term positive outlook for phosphates has not changed, but we are adjust- ing our production levels to match immediate demand and manage our margins,” said Joc O’Rourke, Mosaic president and CEO.
see Mosaic, page 19
February 5, 2016 VOLUME 40 NUMBER 6
Contents
2NOLA NH3 under pressure
2NOLA granular urea spans broad range
3-8 Lunar New Year shuts down Asia
8NOLA K barges dip below $200/st
8Potash, SOPM prices drop at
Carlsbad
CF, CHS commence venture; will meet 46 percent of CHS nitrogen needs
CF Industries Holdings Inc., Deerfield, Ill., and CHS Inc., Inver Grove Heights, Minn., announced Feb. 1 that they have commenced their previously announced nitrogen fertilizer strategic venture (GM Aug. 17, 2015). CHS completed its $2.8 billion equity investment in CF Industries Nitrogen LLC, a CF Industries subsidiary, and on Feb. 1 began receiving delivery of urea and UAN from CF under a long- term supply agreement.
“We are pleased today to start our strategic venture with CHS, beginning the next chapter in a mutually beneficial long-term relationship,” said Tony Will, CF president and CEO. “The venture will deliver attractive returns to CF shareholders as the equity investment helps support our longstanding capital allocation priorities, see CF, CHS, page 20
11Top execs named at Iowa Fertilizer, Shrieve, TKI
12Yara opens Stockton bagging line
13GM Webinar March 2
14EuroChem, Agrinos ink specialty fert deal
14New OCP plant comes up
16Scotts buys stake in Bonnie
17Central Garden tanks up on
Earth Juice
Pemex buys Grupo Fertinal, confirms commitment to domestic market
Petroleos Mexicanos (Pemex), through its subsidiary production company Fertil- izers Pemex (EPS), said Jan. 29 that it has completed the purchase of Grupo Fertinal for US$255 million. Green Markets reported that Pemex was closely looking at the purchase late last year (GM Nov. 23, 2015).
The deal includes existing assets at Lazaro Cardena, Michoacan, and a phosphate rock mine located in San Juan de la Costa, Baja California, Sur. Pemex said the deal gives it about 1.2 million mt/y of solid fertilizer production, or about 30 percent of domestic fertilizer demand, which the company puts at 4.2 million mt/y for all three major nutrients. Fertinal has approximately 1. 2 million mt/y of DAP/MAP/ TSP capacity at Lazara Cardenas and some 2 million mt/y phos rock capacity at Baja, according to the Green Markets Global DAP/MAP Supply & Demand Model.
Pemex said it will recover the investment within 36 months once the operations see Pemex, page 20
19PhosAgro phosphate sales up in 2015
Find more than 270 spot
fertilizer prices at:
www.FertilizerPricing.com
SPOT BARGE PRICES
St/FOB U.S. Gulf
*All prices, see pages 4-5
Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
Market Watch
AMMONIA
U.S.Gulf/Tampa:Nothing new was reported in theTampa market last week. Sources reported that a large quantity of NOLA tons were sold below Tampa prices, with the NOLA range quoted at $261-$271/st FOB.
Sources said the drop was justified by falling prices in the Cornbelt, as well as less ammonia earmarked for Mosaic, which announced it would be cutting DAP production. Ammonia producers also saw natural gas prices drop below $2.00/mmBtu again last week.
MarchNYNEXnaturalgasclosed Feb.4at$1.972/mmBtu, compared to the Jan. 28 close of $2.182/mmBtu one week earlier.
Eastern Cornbelt: After the prior week’s sizable drop in ammonia prices in the region, which was spurred by new post- ings from large players, sources said spot pricing levels were still holding at $420-$425/st FOB regional terminals in early February, with the low in Illinois and the upper end in Indiana.
Although sources reported no one needling for still-lower ammonia prices last week, they also confirmed that “no one is knocking the door down, either.” Both dealers and retail buyers “are still holding out to make sure they get the lowest price,” said one contact, even with unconfirmed reports of some regional suppliers offering limited price protection for new ammonia orders.
Onesourcesaidthenewlowerpostings“havereallyscrewed up the market,” undermining efforts by some regional sup-
U.S. Gulf NOLA
pliers to hold prices to the prepay levels that had initially yielded some spring commitments. “Some doors have been closed, so to speak,” said one regional contact.
Western Cornbelt: The ammonia market was steady at $360-$415/st FOB in the Western Cornbelt, with the low quoted in Nebraska and the upper end FOB terminals in central Iowa and Missouri. Delivered tons were pegged at $360-$380/st in the region from southern production points.
Southern Plains: The anhydrous ammonia market had reportedly slipped to $280-$285/st FOB on the low end out of some regional production points, with the upper end of the regional range quoted at $340/st FOB pipeline terminals.
South Central: The anhydrous ammonia market was quoted at $380-$420/st FOB in the region, down $25/st or more from last report, with the low at Memphis, Tenn., and the upper end FOB Henderson, Ky.
Black Sea: Pressure is being applied to producers to accept prices as low as $240/mt FOB. The main force is coming from Morocco, where OCP is trying to use its large-scale purchases to get lower prices.
Sources said at least for now, $240/mt FOB is not achiev- able. Prices are in the $250s/mt FOB for the limited tonnage that is available.
MiddleEast:Arab producers are long on material. Sources said Sabic in particular is being hit hard by weak demand and buyers demanding lower prices for product.
Namhae reportedly concluded a purchase at $350/mt CFR into South Korea. Sources said the netback on the deal came to $270-$275/mt FOB.
UREA
U.S. Gulf: Prompt granular barges moved last week, start- ing the week as low as $187/st FOB and then climbing to $205/st FOB before firming near that number.
Sources said there was a lot of activity, with CF coming into the market to buy four or five barges, but not at the high end of the range. By Thursday, February product was being offered at $206-$208/st FOB and March at $210/st FOB.
Prills remained hard to gauge, with the last done piece of prompt business called $225/st FOB. Second-half February tons were called $220-$230/st FOB. Overall, product is re- ported to be scarce, although Yara is reported to be bringing in a Libyan vessel soon.
Eastern Cornbelt: Granular urea continued to be quoted at $235-$250/st FOB regional terminals in early February, with the low reported in Cincinnati, Ohio, for prompt tons.
Western Cornbelt: The granular urea market remained flat at $245-$255/st FOB in the Western Cornbelt.
Southern Plains: Granular urea was quoted at $245-$250/st FOBCatoosa,Okla.,downsome$5-$15/stfromlastreport,with inventories continuing to be described as tight due toArkansas River logistics. “Urea has begun to arrive by barge in the Tulsa market, but early barges are going to cover contracts, so spot product is still limited,” said one source.
SouthCentral: The South Central terminal market contin- ued to slip, but some sources speculated that price declines may be reaching their limit. “Buyers are still on the sidelines, but I’m getting the feeling that we may be at the bottom,” said
2Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
one regional contact. “With good weather we will be busy during the second half of February, but distribution could be a big concern because of the lack of prepay this year.” Granular urea pricing had reportedly fallen to $235- $255/st FOB terminals in the South Central region, down some $15-$20/st from mid-January levels, with the low at Convent, La., and the upper end out of spot Arkansas River locations. The urea market FOB Memphis was pegged at
the $240/st FOB level in early February.
Southeast: Granular urea pricing had reportedly slipped to $275-$280/st FOB port terminals in the Southeast, down another $5-$10/st from last report. One source said rail-DEL tons could also be had at the $275/st level on a spot basis in early February.
Sources continued to report a “very slow” fertilizer pace in the region, due both to wet weather and to cutbacks in wheat acreage. One Carolina contact said growers in his area would do some wheat topdressing “as soon as the weather changes,” but volumes would likely be only half of normal due to acreage reductions.
Anotherregionalcontactreportedaslightuptickinfertilizer orders in early February, saying he’d “taken more orders in the last five days than in the last two months.” Low inventories continued to be reported throughout the region, however. “We’re theoretically three weeks away from the field here,” noted one source.
India: The government reported that imports were right on the mark for 2015. Industry watchers estimated India would need to import 8-9 million tons in 2015, and govern- ment figures released this week showed 2015 imports at 8.85 million tons.
Besides the public tenders conducted by MMTC, STC, and IPL, India imports urea from a joint venture operation in Oman. The output of that plant regularly supplies material to India. Just this week, a shipment of 43,000 mt from the Oman facility was unloaded at Vizag.
Sources said India is in no rush to start its 2016 buying. With prices showing no sign of rebounding, sources said the Indian buying houses appear to be willing to wait until the last minute to issue the first tender of the year. Earlier predictions of a tender call in early March are now being pushed back to late March or early April.
The new fiscal year starts April 1. Sources said the level of subsidies available for urea will be clearer by mid-March. ReportsoutofIndiaarealreadyindicatingthatthegovernment is looking for ways to reduce the amount it pays in subsidies. The lower international price is a big help in that effort.
The government is also putting its support behind building new urea plants, renovating existing facilities, or re-opening shuttered plants to cut down on the amount of imported urea. Government officials argue that it is cheaper for the govern- ment to provide support to the domestic producers than to keep importing urea.
China: Production started to slow down in early February in anticipation of the Lunar New Year Golden Week to take place next week.
One trader said expectations are that domestic demand will kick in when everyone returns to work after Feb. 15,
and this has provided a small bump in urea prices. Traders with short positions reportedly moved quickly to nail down cargoes before domestic demand affected prices.
One source worked prices back to the mid-$180s/mt FOB basedonadealtoThailand.Traderssaid,however,thatthedeal was for product from Kuwait and not China. They cautioned against using a China-equivalent price in calculating prices.
Advocates argue that recent small cargoes of granular product to South Korea also have netbacks in the mid- to upper-$180s/mt FOB.
The general consensus, however, has Chinese granular in the $200-$205/mt FOB range, with prills at $195-$200/mt FOB. Sources said the dominant prill price under discussion with producers is closer to the $195/mt FOB level than to the higher end of the range.
Middle East:An explosion along a natural gas pipeline in Egypt forced the urea producers to go offline for 2-4 days. Mediareportssaidtheexplosionwascarriedoutbyopponents of the current government.
Urea traders said the shutdown will have little impact on the market. One trader noted that the world is awash in urea. He pointed out that southern Europe is buying from China and theArab Gulf, when normally Egypt, other NorthAfrican plants, and Yuzhnyy would have an edge into the European market. Now, however, with product prices and freight rates so low, material can come all the way from northern China and be competitive.
A sale of 20,000 mt to Thailand from Kuwait may have pushed the price in the mid-$180s/mt FOB, said one trader. Other sources maintain the price has not yet dropped below $190/mt FOB. They are saying, however, that no one would be surprised to soon see prices in the mid-$180s/mt FOB.
Adding to the pressure on Arab producers are soft U.S. NOLA prices and strong pressure from Brazil for lower prices. One trader said the lack of demand from Pakistan and Bangladesh also means suppliers have to look elsewhere, and buyers everywhere are demanding lower prices.
Indonesia: The Indonesian government continues to hold off on its tender to find companies to handle its urea exports.
Sources said this week that the government and produc- ers are having a hard time accepting the low global prices. One trader said nothing will happen in terms of arranging for exports – including an auction – until prices move back into the $230s/mt FOB.
The last bit of public business was just as the last year closed. Prices in those deals put the Indonesian market at $210-$220/mt FOB. No sales have occurred so far this year because no new export permits have been issued.Traders said theonlymovementthisyearhasbeenproductthatshouldhave been shipped by Dec. 31. The delays in shipment, said one source, were tied to demands by buyers for cheaper prices.
Nepal: The Nepal government closes a tender Feb. 15 for 20,000mtofurea.ThetenderincludescallsforMOPandDAP.
The product is to be bagged and delivered to a Nepal warehouse on the Indian border.
Pakistan: Urea sales in Pakistan during the 2015 calendar year are expected to see a meager decline of 3 percent, to 5.560 million mt versus 5.705 million mt during 2014.
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
®
A Bloomberg BNA Business
4Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
PRICE QUOTES DO NOT REFLECT ACTUAL TRANSACTIONS, BUT REPRESENT CURRENT MARKET CONDITIONS AS PERCEIVED BY SELECTED BUYERS AND SELLERS.
PRICE NOTES: Prices are based on large transactions involving truckloads or larger volumes. All prices are net of discounts for volume, cash, or prompt payment, if such are offered. Prices listed on an FOB basis are at the producer’s plant gate, terminal, or pipeline point. CFR prices include transportation to the destination port. Delivered (DEL) prices include transportation costs to the retail dealer’s premises or the nearest accessible railhead. All prices are spot unless indicated with a (c) for contract. The notation (mt) denotes metric ton. The notation (lt) denotes long ton. The notation NA (not available) means that a current price is not obtainable. Price spreads shown for a region are attributable to localized price differences or differing sizes of purchase. CANADA: Western and Eastern Canada prices are CAD per metric ton. Vancouver prices are USD per metric ton. Saskatchewan prices are USD per short ton. CHINA: Factory prices are CNY per metric ton, as provided by Sunsirs. Other China prices are USD per metric ton.
COMMODITY NOTES: UAN: Domestic prices are quoted on the basis of nutrient units; to convert to short ton, multiply the nutrient value (e.g., 28, 30, or 32) by the price shown. UREA: All prices
are granular unless indicated as prill, or a bulk which is both prill and granular. PHOSPHORIC ACID: Domestic prices are quoted on the basis of nutrient units; to convert to short ton, multiply the
nutrient value (e.g., 54 for MGA, 68 for SPA) by the price shown. SULFUR: Recovered Tampa, New Orleans, and Houston prices are for 1st quarter.
REGIONS: Visit www.FertilizerPricing.com/GM-PriceNotation for regional descriptions.
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
A research house reported that Indian urea sales during the year remained under pressure due to a hike in gas prices in September and the resulting increase in prices for bagged urea, weak farm agronomics, and declining international urea prices.
A price hike from urea manufacturers for bagged urea resulted into very low sales from September through October 2015. Urea inventories piled up as a result, which forced manufacturers to reduce bagged urea prices in November and December 2015. This led to sales of 623,000 mt in November and 782,000 mt in December.
NITROGEN SOLUTIONS
U.S.Gulf:Price ideaswere $155-$160/st($4.84-$5.00/unit) FOB based on the latest offers being made into the market. In the meantime, sources said East Coast vessels had fallen into the $165-$170/mt CFR range, if not lower.
There were reports that CF was involved in a trade with Nitron to send a 25,000 ton vessel to SouthAmerica at a price of $176/mt CFR, which could reportedly netback to NOLA at $136/st FOB. Sources says this adds more weight to the argument that UAN barge prices should go lower.
Eastern Cornbelt: The low end of the UAN-28 market remained at $175/st ($6.25/unit) for UAN-28 FOB Cincinnati in early February, with Illinois sources quoting UAN-32 at $220.80-$222.40/st ($6.90-$6.95/unit) FOB river terminals for spot tons.
Western Cornbelt: UAN-32 was unchanged at $222.40- $230/stFOB($6.95-$7.19/unit)FOBterminalsintheWestern Cornbelt.
Southern Plains: UAN-32 pricing was down in the Southern Plains. Sources quoted the low end of the market at $195-$200/st ($6.09-$6.25/unit) FOB regional production points for new business, with the upper end reported at the $210/st ($6.56/unit) FOB terminal level.
One contact referred to the gap between current market levels and earlier fill levels. “This has a lot of people stirred up, and my prediction is that the next fill season will result in a lot of ‘no thank yous’,” he said. “That would be the polite version.”
South Central: UAN-32 pricing had reportedly slipped $200-$210/st ($6.25-$6.56/unit) FOB in the South Central region, down some $5-$10/st from last report, with the low reported in the Memphis market.
Southeast: UAN pricing continued to fall in the South- east. Although UAN-32 reference prices remained as high as $190/st ($5.94/unit) FOB at some port locations, sources pegged the market at $173-$178/st ($5.41-$5.56/unit) FOB regional terminals for actual offers, with the low reported in Georgia.
Althoughsomesourcessaidactivitywas“pickingup”inearly February,otherscontinuedtodescribesalesas“thin,”with“very little conversation because (the market) continues to drop.”
AMMONIUM NITRATE
U.S. Gulf: Price ideas continued to be called $200-$215/st FOB,withlittleinterest.Sourcesreportedthatforwardbusiness was being discussed in the middle of that range.
Western Cornbelt: Ammonium nitrate remained at $275- $280/st FOB in the Western Cornbelt, where available.
Southern Plains: The ammonium nitrate market was quoted at $255-$260/st FOB Catoosa for the last reported business.
South Central: Ammonium nitrate remained at $250- $255/st FOB in the South Central region in early February.
Southeast: Ammonium nitrate remained at $295-$300/st FOB Tampa for truck tons.
AMMONIUM SULFATE
Eastern Cornbelt: Granular ammonium sulfate was unchanged at $265-$280/st FOB and $285-$295/st DEL in the Eastern Cornbelt.
Ammonium thiosulfate was steady at $325-$335/st FOB in the region.
Western Cornbelt: Granular ammonium sulfate was steady at $265-$270/st FOB regional terminals in the West- ern Cornbelt.
Ammonium thiosulfate was unchanged at $295-$315/st FOB in the region.
Southern Plains: Granular ammonium sulfate was steady at $240-$275/st FOB in the Texas market, with coarse and standard grade priced $10/st and $20/st lower than granular, respectively.
Ammonium thiosulfate remained at $295-$300/st FOB in the Southern Plains.
South Central: Granular ammonium sulfate was pegged at $245-$260/st FOB in the South Central region, with the low reported at Memphis and representing a $5/st drop from mid-January pricing levels.
Ammonium thiosulfate remained at a nominal $295- $305/st FOB in the region, where available.
Southeast: The granular ammonium sulfate market was steady at $270-$280/st FOB in the Southeast, with delivered tons steady at $290/st DEL in the Carolinas, $300/st DEL in Georgia andAlabama, and $305/st DELin Florida. Reference pricing for standard grade ammonium sulfate was unchanged at $200/st DEL in Florida.
China: The crystalline grade ammonium sulfate market has reportedly slipped a bit in limited sales to regional buy- ers. Sources say netbacks show prices may have dropped below $100/mt FOB.
Industry watchers said supplies of steel grade ammonium sulfate are dropping as Chinese steel plants cut back on production. The reduction in output is not only tied to the Lunar New Year week-long celebrations, but also to reduced demandforChinesesteelastheChineseeconomyslowsdown.
PHOSPHATES
Central Florida: Transactions on the Central Florida phosphate market were reported at $360-$370/st FOB for DAP, down from $370/st FOB at last report. MAPwas $370- $380/st FOB, down from the prior week’s $380/st FOB.
U.S. Gulf: A Feb. 3 announcement that Mosaic would curtail phosphate production by up to 400,000 st in the first quarter was met with measured excitement in the NOLA barge market.
6Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
Poised to record a small price drop for the week prior to the news, the prompt DAP market edged higher in the hours following the announcement, to a range of $312-$325/st FOB. New offers were generally quoted around $327/st FOB on Feb. 4, although some were offering as high as $335/st FOB, sources said.
First-quarter paper firmed as well, coming in at $315- $326/st FOB, although March physical was reported as low as $305/st FOB for DAP and MAP.
Mosaic’s announcement comes amid tumbling global phosphate prices. NOLA DAP is down approximately 28 percent versus February 2014, and MAP’s decline has been even more pronounced. Extreme weakness in the Brazil MAP market – down more than 35 percent from the year-ago – played a part as well, limiting opportunities for offshore sales.
“Mosaic believes that current market prices do not reflect the value we see for our products,” a Mosaic spokesperson said. “We are not participating nor selling at the low price seen in Brazil today, and at NOLA in the last few weeks.” While some market players were quick to point to the curtailment as sparking the market, others were unconvinced. “The curtailment announcement is mostly smoke and mirrors. It won’t have much effect,” said one trader, while simulta- neously acknowledging the firmer market. “Paper jumped a little overnight. I think possibly (it was) some short-covering
just in case this Mosaic thing has an impact.”
While stagnating commodity levels and prodigious NOLA supply have commonly taken the blame for the recent soft market, observers have increasingly pointed to delayed spring purchasing for the continued weakness.
“It was a supply issue, but lately that’s shifted,” said one trader. “There’s just not enough demand out there to get rid of everything that’s available. What we need now is to get into the season, get things going.”
Additional supply is expected soon at NOLA. Sources anticipate a Moroccan cargo on or around Feb. 10, and a vessel loaded with 30,000 mt of DAP and MAP was report- edly due in March.
The NOLA DAP market was quoted in a range of $312- $325/st FOB, up from $310-$323/st FOB at last report. MAP was called flat at $315-$328/st FOB.
Eastern Cornbelt: The regional DAP market remained at $355-$365/st FOB in the Eastern Cornbelt, with MAP roughly $5/st higher than DAP.
The 10-34-0 market was quoted at $510-$515/st FOB in the region.
Western Cornbelt: Sources pegged the DAP market at $360-$370/st FOB most regional terminals in the Western Cornbelt, with MAP $5/st higher than DAP.
10-34-0 continued to be quoted at $475-$500/st FOB in the region, with the low in Nebraska and the upper end in Iowa.
SouthernPlains: Sources quoted the DAPmarket at $350- $360/st FOB Catoosa, down $15-$20/st from mid-January pricing levels. Although there were still reports of suppliers “waiting for barges to arrive” after earlier high-water restric- tions, other sources said more tons seemed to be available at the port in early February. MAP was quoted in the same range as DAP at the port.
The 10-34-0 market had reportedly slipped to $475-$495/st FOB in the Southern Plains, down some $10-$20/st from last report. “In comparison to four months ago, there is now no problem finding 10-34-0,” said one regional contact.
Agrium’s Feb. 1 phosphoric acid postings include $1,050/st of P2O5 for rail-DEL SPA and MGA in Kansas and Colorado, and $1,065/st of P2O5 for rail-DEL tons in Oklahoma and Texas. Those levels were unchanged from January and December postings.
South Central: DAP was quoted at $360-$375/st FOB out of warehouses in the South Central region, down another $5-$10/st from mid-January pricing levels, with the low confirmed at Memphis and the upper end in the Arkansas market.
TSP was reported at $335-$355/st FOB in the region, de- pending on location, with the lower end of the market again reported FOB Memphis.
Southeast: The Aurora, N.C., DAP price reportedly dropped to $390/st FOB in early February, down from the previous $405/st FOB level.
U.S. Export: Producers reported no new business on the Gulf export market. The most recently publicized transaction out of the Gulf, announced in early December, consisted of 10,000 mt of DAP sold into Central America.
Price ideas were unchanged at $380-$385/mt FOB.
The first-quarter price of phosphoric acid sold to India was $715/mt CFR.
Brazil: The Brazil MAP market continued to slide last week. Fresh transactions were quoted in the $325-$340/mt CFR range, down from the previous week’s $340/mt FOB.
Saudi Arabia: Last-done from Saudi Arabia was called
International Urea
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
$375-$385/mt FOB, based on netbacks from cargoes destined for India and Bangladesh.
China: Reports of a few small sales confirm that prices remain in the upper-$380s/mt or low-$390s/mt FOB.
Producersareexpectedtoruntheirplantsatabareminimum during next week’s Lunar New Year celebrations. Sources reported that some plants had already started to shut down at least one line of production because of the lack of business.
Suppliers are hoping DAPpurchases will start after the New Year holiday ends. One source noted that domestic orders have not come in as expected. Optimists are writing off the delay to the New Year break. Others, however, are claiming that poor weather conditions in China have lowered demand for DAP in the country.
Nepal: Nepal’s government will close a tender on Feb. 16 for 15,000 mt of DAP. The product is to be delivered in bags to a Nepal warehouse on the Indian border.
Pakistan: DAP sales in Pakistan during 2015 reportedly surged by an estimated 12 percent, to 1.849 million mt com- pared with 1.655 million mt in 2014.
The surge was spurred be federal government subsidies dur- ing the Rabi season. Fauji Fertilizer Bin Qasim’s DAP sales volume reportedly grew by an estimated 8 percent, to 765,000 mt in 2015 versus 709,000 mt in 2014. Similarly, consumption of imported DAP was estimated to increase by 15 percent, to 1.084 million in 2015, compared with 946,000 mt in 2014.
POTASH
U.S. Gulf: Potash barge prices cratered again last week, with new sales as low as $198/st FOB. Others put the market in the $202-$205/st FOB range.
DAP
In the meantime, Gavilon is bringing in a 25,000 mt vessel next week loaded with BPC product.
Eastern Cornbelt: The potash market was pegged at $240-$260/st FOB in the Eastern Cornbelt, with the low end of the range confirmed for spot offers in the Illinois market in early February. The low end of the range reflected another $10/st drop from the previous week.
Western Cornbelt: Sources confirmed the low end of the potash market at $240/st FOB on a spot basis in the Western Cornbelt, and this was for “small quantities.” The upper end of the regional range remained at the $260/st FOB reference levels for producer tons ordered by Feb. 5.
Southern Plains: Sources reported significantly lower potash prices in the Southern Plains in early February. The market FOB Carlsbad, N.M., had reportedly dropped to $260-$267/st FOB from Intrepid, down $40/st from last re- port, with the low for red granular and the upper end for 62 percent white. The potash market FOB Catoosa was down to $255-$260/st FOB.
SOP Magnesia FOB Carlsbad was lower as well, with sources quoting the market at $350-$355/st, down $35- $45/st from the previous level.
South Central: The potash market was pegged at $260- $275/st FOB warehouses in the South Central region, down $5-$20/st from last report, depending on location. The low end of the range was once again reported in the Memphis market, with the upper end in Arkansas.
Southeast: Potash experienced big pricing declines in the Southeast in early February. Sources quoted the market at $250-$260/st FOB port terminals and $270-$275/st rail-DEL in the region, down $20-$30/st from last report. Sources were uncertainifthenewlevelswouldgeneratenewsales,however.
Northwest Europe: Demand remains weak, with prices for granular material currently assessed at €280-€300/mt CIF.
Israel: Potassium nitrate was put in the $800-$1,000/mt range last week, with the wide range depending on grade or whether bulk or bagged.
Nepal: The Nepalese government has a tender for 5,000 mt of MOP closing Feb. 15. The tender includes calls for DAP and urea.
Product is to be bagged and delivered to a Nepal warehouse on the Indian border.
SULFUR
Tampa: Questions regarding the effect of Mosaic’s first- quarter phosphate production curtailment on the market took center stage in an otherwise slow week.
Some believed the cutback was a bad omen for second- quarter molten sulfur pricing. “Sulfur took a downturn these last two quarters,” said one market player. “Usually you would expect to see an uptick in Q2, but now I’m not sure I can see that happening.”
Others took a brighter view, however. “Conversations surrounding Mosaic’s announced curtailment have been in the marketplace, but it’s nothing the spring fertilizer season won’t resolve in the next 30-45 days,” said one source.
The curtailment news was expected to delay Mosaic’s New Wales, Fla., solid sulfur melter from entering production.The
8Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
unit was reportedly languishing in the commissioning phase as of the previous report, despite Mosaic’s original plan to bring it online in late October 2015.
Sources expected the facility to finally enter production in February. Suddenly flush with excess sulfur supply due to the newly reduced production schedule, however, the melter’s timeline is now up in the air. “(Mosaic) is not in a real hurry to get the melter up and running,” said one a source, “not when (they are) struggling to contain sulfur across a high point.”
The contract price of molten sulfur delivered to Tampa was $95/lt for the first quarter, down $15/lt from $110/lt in the fourth quarter.
Refinery utilization was down for the week, according to the U.S. Energy InformationAdministration (EIA). Capacity for the week ending Jan. 29 was 86.6 percent, a 0.8 percent decline from the previous week’s 87.4 percent a week, and represented a fifth consecutive week of falling domestic utilization. Capacity was also lower than the year-ago 89.9 percent, but beat the 85.9 percent five-year average.
Averagedailycrudeinputsweremarginallylowerat15.615 million barrels/d, 24,000 barrels below the 15.639 million barrels/d total reported during the previous week.
U.S. Gulf: The Gulf price of solid sulfur was called $90/mt FOB for the week, based on recent transactions into Brazil.
Vancouver: Reflecting a “broad spectrum of deals,” the Vancouver spot market was quoted in a range of $85-$105/mt FOB,downfrom$110-$115/mttheweekbefore.SalestoChina were responsible for the low end of the range, sources said.
The Chinese spot market was on hold heading into the Feb.
8 Lunar New Year celebration, with no new business expected to transpire before Feb. 15 at the earliest, and possibly not until March. Last-done Chinese spot was called $95-$100/mt CFR.
Sources speculated that lackluster Chinese demand brought on by bad weather could trigger a phosphate production cur- tailment by Chinese producers, threatening to further erode the country’s weak sulfur import market.
Alberta producer netbacks were reported in a range of (-)$12-$60/mt FOB.
West Coast: Trailing Vancouver lower, West Coast formed sulfur was called $80-$100/mt FOB, down from $105-$110/mt FOB at last report.
Molten contracts continued to land in a range of $65- $115/lt FOB for the first quarter, sources said.
ADNOC:TheAbu Dhabi National Oil Co. released pricing for February loading last week. New offers were quoted at $105/mt FOB Ruwais, a decline of $17/mt FOB from Janu- ary’s $122/mt FOB level.
Aramco: Formed Saudi Aramco sulfur was priced at $115/mt FOB Jubail for February, $13/mt FOB below the $128/mt FOB January price.
Tasweeq:TasweeqalsoannouncedlowerpricingforFebru- ary. Current-month offers were listed at $89/mt Ras Laffan, a drop of $30/mt FOB from the January price of $119/mt.
SULFURIC ACID
U.S. Gulf: Price ideas for sulfuric acid cargoes imported to the Gulf of Mexico were quoted in a range of $45-$50/mt CFR, unchanged from the previous report.
The Brazilian sulfuric acid market was called $45-$50/mt CFR, and vessels to Chile were expected to command $55- $65/mt CFR.
Texas-based sulfuric acid producer Eco Services recently announcedalong-termagreementwithCitgoPetroleumCorp. to supply sulfuric acid regeneration to Citgo’s Lake Charles Refining Complex. The agreement, described as a multi-year deal by Eco Services, will allow Citgo to decommission a sulfuric acid plant located at the Lake Charles site.
Crops/Weather
Grain Futures: As of 4:00 p.m. on Feb. 4, corn and soy- bean futures were higher compared to the week before, but wheat was down.
March 2016 corn was posted at $3.685/bushel, up from $3.655/bushel, while corn for May 2016 firmed to $3.735/bushel from the prior week’s $3.705/bushel. Con- tracts for December 2016 corn were $3.9125/bushel, up from $3.875/bushel the week before.
Soybean prices for March 2016 were $8.745/bushel, higher than the prior week’s $8.6775/bushel. May 2016 soybeans firmed to $8.775/bushel from $8.705/bushel at last report, while November 2016 soybeans moved to $8.8825/bushel, up from $8.80/bushel the week before.
March 2016 wheat punched in at $4.5975/bushel, down from$4.6475/bushel,whileJuly2016wheatcontractsslipped to $4.7975/bushel from the previous week’s $4.8575/bushel. Wheat for September 2016 was $4.935/bushel, down from $4.9925/bushel one week earlier.
Eastern Cornbelt: Wet weather settled over much of the Eastern Cornbelt in early February, resulting in flash flood warnings for parts of southern Illinois and Indiana on Feb. 2.
Rainfall left fields sloppy in central Ohio at midweek as well, with a few inches of lake effect snow reported in the state’s northern counties. Temperatures in the 50s were reported across Ohio at midweek, but dropped to the 30s as the week progressed.
Western Cornbelt: A powerful winter storm on Feb. 2-3 brought significant snowfall to multiple locations in Nebraska, and also blanked northwestern Iowa with 2-6 inches. Light snow was also reported in the Kansas City, Mo., area at midweek.
Snowfall totals in Nebraska on Feb. 2 included 18 inches in Grand Island, 16 inches in Hastings, Verdigre, and Wayne, and 14 inches in Norfolk. The heavy accumulation left more than 20,000peoplewithoutpower,andalsoresultedintheclosureof a275-milestretchofInterstate80fromOgallalaeasttoLincoln.
Join Green Markets at these upcoming conferences and webinars
TFI Annual Meeting, Feb. 8-10, Orlando
IFA Annual Meeting, May 30, Moscow
SW Fertilizer Conference, July 16, San Antonio
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
Southern Plains: Blizzard conditions in eastern Colorado and northwestern Kansas early in the week resulted in several highway closures, including a lengthy stretch of Interstate 70 from Salina west to the Colorado border.
The same storm brought rainfall and gusty winds to other areas of Kansas and Oklahoma, with reports of quarter-size hail and 65 mph winds in some locations. Wet weather was also reported in New Mexico and Texas, with sources reporting a good soil moisture profile throughout much of the Southern Plains.
“I try not to complain about weather since nothing we do or say can impact it, but I’m about to start,” said one regional contact at midweek, who reported that field applications were just starting in his trade area early in the week before being shut down by rain. “We received on the average about one inch in ourarea.Isupposethat’sbetterthan6-footsnowdrifts,though.”
South Central: Strong storms brought damaging winds to parts of Arkansas, Tennessee, Louisiana, and Mississippi in early February. A number of tornadoes were confirmed on Feb. 2 in eastern Mississippi, and flood watches remained in effect for portions of Kentucky and middle Tennessee on Feb. 3. Tornado warnings were also in effect in southeastern Louisiana on Feb. 2.
Wet field conditions made for minimal activity in the region last week. “The ground is still very wet, and we are not moving much fertilizer at all,” said oneArkansas contact. “However, once it dries, we should get busy.”
Southeast: Wild weather churned through parts of the Southeast at midweek, with multiple tornadoes confirmed on Feb. 2 in western Alabama.
Tornado activity was also reported in southeastern Georgia and South Carolina, while flash flooding was reported in parts of the southern Appalachians in North Carolina after torren- tial rains. News reports talked of road closures in northern Virginia on Feb. 2 after heavy downpours caused flooding.
Transportation
U.S. Gulf: Recent high water in the Gulf shipping region was much-improved for the week, with levels at Baton Rouge reading 34.9 feet and falling on Feb. 4, below the 35-foot flood stage. The New Orleans gauge came in at 13.85 feet and falling on Feb. 4, also below flood stage.
Despite the improvement, the Charenton, East Calumet, and West Calumet Floodgates were closed to transit for the week due to high water.
Shippers put Algiers Lock delays at 13-16 hours, with 16 boats queued for service. Industrial Lock reported wait times of 4-9 hours for the week, and transit through Port Allen Lock was called 6-8 hours with six vessels in line to lock.
Bayou Sorrel Lock waits came in at 16-18 hours with 11 boats in line, and a 4.9-foot differential between the lock’s flood-side and land-side gauges necessitated extra tow lines on vessels. Bayou Boeuf Lock guide wall repairs, scheduled throughFeb.11,pushedwaitsto10-12hoursfortheweek.The lock is closed to daylight transit Monday through Thursday.
Harvey Lock reopened to knockout tows last week thanks to falling river levels, and the Corps estimated navigation through the lock at two hours for the week. Transit through Calcasieu Lock was estimated at 16 hours with 16 vessels queued, and clearance through the West Port Arthur Bridge was reduced by three feet due to painting and maintenance operations slated to run through April 30.
The Corps continued to warn of intermittent Brazos Lock closures during daylight hours, Monday through Friday, due to repairs to both the east and west floodgates. Brazos Lock delays were estimated at 8-10 hours, with nine boats waiting to lock.
Lower Mississippi River: Shippers continued to report high water and fasts flows on the Lower Mississippi River, leading to towing restrictions and increased transit times.
The Vicksburg gauge remained above the 35-foot action stage, reading 36.59 feet on Feb. 4. Forecasts called for depths to level off above the 35-foot mark in the coming days. Memphis levels were rising on Feb. 4, with the gauge showing 17.27 feet and forecasts called for levels to hit 19.9 feet on Feb. 8.
Upper Mississippi River: Icy conditions were reported on the Upper Mississippi for the week.
Travel times through Mel Price Lock were called 1-3 hours with 3 vessels queued, and the Corps put Lock 27 wait times at 1-2 hours. The Mel Price Lock auxiliary chamber is scheduled to undergo sporadic shutdowns on Feb. 8-10.
Rainfall expected over the weekend was forecast to swell the St. Louis gauge to 17.3 feet by Feb. 7, up from 15.33 feet on Feb. 4.
The Corps continued to wait for suitable conditions to restart its annual rock removal project at Thebes, Ill. The work will resume when river levels dip below 15 feet at Cape Girardeau, Mo. The gauge there read 23.14 feet and rising on Feb. 4, with projections pointing to 24.7 feet on Feb. 8. The Thebes project is expected to run during daylight hours, seven days per week, with tows capped at 15 barges during work hours.
Anumber of Upper River locks remain closed for the winter season.Locks13-21areslatedtoopenforspringnavigationon March 4, while Lock 9 will resume operations on March 17.
Illinois River: Icy conditions persisted on the Illinois River last week, shippers said. High-water levels at Havana and Beardstown had receded to action-stage levels at 13.01 feet as of Feb. 4, but forecasters expected weekend rains to push the river back into flood-stage territory, with an expected crest of 15.3 feet on Feb. 7.
Ice coverage remained at 100 percent over Peoria Lake, shippers said, and solid ice continued to be reported both above and below T.J. O’Brien Lock, deterring all but one vessel from transiting for the week. One-way travel continued at Miles 167-181 due to ice coverage.
Lockport Lock and Marseilles Lock delays averaged 1-2 hours each. Transit through Starved Rock Lock needed just one additional hour for the week, and locking was suspended at Peoria and LaGrange Locks, allowing vessels to pass freely.
Ohio River: Shippers said ice flows were reduced on the Ohio River last week, marginally improving transit times.
10Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
High-water conditions and fast flows remained a concern, however.
River levels at Cairo climbed above the 32-foot action stage, with the gauge reading 32.9 feet and rising on Feb.
4.Forecasters expected levels to reach 38.2 feet on Feb. 8, approaching the region’s 40-foot flood stage.
Locks 52 and 53 remained out of operation for the week, allowing tows to pass without locking. Nevertheless, conges- tion pushed wait times to 1-2 hours at both locks. Emsworth Lock delays were timed at an hour, and R.C. Byrd Lock waits were described as an hour or less.
Further out in 2016, Montgomery Lock is scheduled to close for maintenance May 9 through June 10, and a second shutdown will stretch from Aug. 15 to Sept. 30. The Ems- worth Lock main chamber is expected to close from June
20until Aug. 5.
Icy conditions slowed transits on theAllegheny River, and navigation resumed through the Oakmont/Hulton Bridge demolition site on Jan. 30.
The Tennessee River’s Chickamauga Lock experienced intermittent 10-11 hour closures for the week. Shippers cited electricalworkatthelock,withaprojectedenddateofFeb.23.
Shippers reported transit delays on the Monongahela River due to ongoing ice conditions. The Braddock Lock and Dam river chamber remained offline last week. Long-term equipment failure is keeping the chamber closed indefinitely, forcing traffic through the land unit instead.
High-water operating conditions were reported on the
Cumberland River. Shippers reported transit slowdowns in Nashville due to maintenance on a CSX railroad bridge.
Passage remained possible, sources said, but delays were expected to continue through the end of February. Barkley Lock repairs are anticipated to spark intermittent delays on Feb. 8-22.
Arkansas River: High water and fast flows have plagued Arkansas River transit in recent weeks, but conditions were substantially improved in early February, sources said.
Looking ahead in 2016, Webbers Falls Lock is slated to shut down on May 16-22, and again Aug. 24 through Sept.
11.The shutdowns are expected to close the river.
Management Briefs
OCI NV’s Iowa Fertilizer Co., Wever, Iowa, said Feb. 4 thatlong-timeindustryveteranLarryHolleyhasbeennamed president, replacing Shawn Rana, who left the company in December due to family reasons. The company noted that it made significant progress during Rana’s tenure and it wished him and his family well. The greenfield project is in the final completion stage, and Rana led it during most of its construction.
“Larry Holley has more than 40 years in the heavy in- dustrial sector, serving in executive level positions across several different complex industries – most notably nitro- gen fertilizer production and project management – and we are excited he will bring that wealth of experience
to Iowa Fertilizer Co.,” said Michael Bennett, OCI NV independent non-executive director. “As the president of Iowa Fertilizer Co., Larry will lead our team in delivering
atimely, reliable, high-quality, and domestic source of fertilizer to farmers throughout the US.”
From 1974-2005, Holley served at Mississippi Chemical Co., rising to the position of chief operating officer, where he directed all elements of the company’s manufacturing and business operations. He was involved in major func- tions, including the early operation of a world-scale KBR ammonia plant in Trinidad as well as major turnarounds across the Miss Chem nitrogen portfolio. Since 2005, Holley has been president and CEO of the CBM Group LLC, and president and general manager of Noranda Alumina LLC and Noranda Bauxite.
Iowa Fertilizer is one of the OCI assets that is in the process of being sold to CF Industries Holdings Inc. (GM Jan. 1, p. 1).
Shrieve Chemical Co.’s board of directors has named Ted Threadgill as president and CEO of the company. He will be responsible for all global entities of Shrieve Chemical and will operate from Shrieve in The Woodlands, Texas.
Threadgill, a native ofWinter Haven, Fla., started his career with trucking conglomerate Comcar Industries in 1989. He joined the fertilizer industry with Comcar subsidiary CTL Distribution in Mulberry Fla., where he served the “Bone Valley” phosphate region. He joined Shrieve in 1994 man- aging Shrieve’s Southeast region, established and managed Shrieve’s Jacksonville sulfuric terminal in 2002, joined the Shrieveboardin2004,andin2015relocatedtoTheWoodlands with his family. He can be reached at tthreadgill@shrieve. com or 281.367.4226.
In other structural changes at Shrieve, after a two-year planned transition, Jerry Jackson, former president of Shrieve Chemical, has stepped down to accept the role of executive vice president and will serve as board chairman. Jackson, a 40-year veteran of the fertilizer and chemical industry remains a full-time employee of Shrieve and can be reached at jjackson@shrieve.com or 281.367.4226.
Replacing Threadgill in the Southeast is Chris Burns, who is the Shrieve marketing manager-Southeast. He joined Shrieve in 2010 from the financial industry and is based out of his office in Winter Haven. He can be reached at cburns@ shrieve.com or 281.367.4226.
Tessenderlo Kerley Inc. (TKI), Phoenix, Ariz., reports that Jordan Burns, president and former CEO, has elected to leave TKI after 20 years in senior management. TKI said that during his time the company established itself as a key supplier to the agricultural sector, with key product offerings in both Crop Nutrition and Crop Protection.
With the announced departure, Luc Tack will assume the responsibilities of president along with his role as CEO.
Wilbur-Ellis reported on Jan. 26 that it has promoted Anne Clearyto the role of vice president, Human Resources. Based in San Francisco, Cleary will continue to provide leader- ship for the company’s people strategy, talent management,
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
organizational design, and succession planning. Cleary has been with Wilbur-Ellis for 15 year, working with the HR group for the company’s Feed business, Connell Brothers business, and Corporate Services group. She also provided support to Wilbur-Ellis Agribusiness and its Alignment for Growth initiative. Prior to joining Wilbur-Ellis, Cleary served as the lead human resources and benefits manager for both public and private companies, including Prescolite Lighting, Dual-Lite Company, and for several departments at the University of California, San Francisco. She currently serves on the governing board of the San Francisco Human Resources Executive Summit and on the USF School of Management Alumni.
Correction: The correct phone number for David Del- aney, who retired from Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan Inc. Feb. 1 (GM Jan. 29, p. 12), is 847.877.4418. His email is: gddelaney10@gmail.com.
News Briefs
Yara inaugurates new bagging line at Stockton
Stockton, Calif.—Yara NorthAmerica reported that its new bagging equipment at the company’s Stockton, Calif., dry fertilizer terminal was officially launched on Jan. 26. Yara invested $5 million in the equipment and facility enhance- ments, which are capable of forming, filling, sealing, and stacking 2,000 bags per hour. “Yara is highly committed to Californiaagricultureandtothedynamicneedsofthegrowers in this region,” said Jorgen C. Arentz Rostrup, president of Yara NorthAmerica. “This new equipment adds even greater flexibility to our already comprehensive service and product line available in California and on the West Coast.” Yara’s Stockton GatewayTerminal has capacity to store up to 80,000 tons of dry materials. The state-of-the-art bagging line is fed by a series of conveyors that carry fertilizer to the line from bulk storage areas. The equipment then forms a bag from a roll of preprinted plastic, which is filled, sealed, and placed on a pallet for storage and eventual shipping.Also automated is the “hood” that is created from plastic sheeting to cover the pallet for added protection, further ensuring product quality. The company said the investment is an example of Yara’s commitment to supplying the important West Coast market with crop nutrition products in a timely manner. Yara broke ground on the $21 million Stockton dry terminal in 2008 (GM Feb. 25, 2008) and completed construction in 2009, reporting at that time that it planned to store and distribute urea, sulfate of potash, calcium nitrate, and the company’s portfolio of dry specialty products from the Stockton facility. In December (GM Dec. 9, 2015), Yara reported that it had signed an agreement to acquire the assets ofWest Sacramento Nitrogen Operations from Agrium Inc. for $27 million. Yara said it will utilize the Sacramento site as an import terminal for finished products, with storage capacity for both dry and liquid fertilizers. The Sacramento facility was formerly
a UAN manufacturing site, and had traditionally imported anhydrous ammonia as a raw material for UAN production. In addition to Stockton and Sacramento, Yara also operates California terminals at San Diego and Port Hueneme.
Midwest Fertilizer bonds eyed by investors
Posey County, Ind.—Indiana’s Posey County is expected to issue an already secured $1.259 billion of tax-exempt debt this summer in what bond analysts are calling one of the tax exempt market’s largest-ever junk-bond sales, according to Bloomberg. “I think they’ve got a buyer base that is comfort- able with the credit,” a bond salesman told Green Markets. The funds will go to fund the $2.6 billion Midwest Fertilizer Co. plant (GM Jan. 29, p. 1), which is expecting a mid-year groundbreaking.Theprojecthasbeenproposedforsometime, and short-term debt has been issued while Midwest has put the project together. The outstanding short-term notes will be redeemed on Aug. 2, according to Bloomberg, and at that point Posey County could issue the 30-year notes. The notes were made available under the Heartland Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2008. Midwest is majority-owned by Pakistan-based Fatima Group. Similar financing was used for OCI NV’s Iowa Fertilizer Co. nitrogen facility in Wever, Iowa. Cur- rent production capacity totals are put at ammonia 800,000 mt/y, UAN 1.565 million mt/y, nitric acid 560,000 mt/y, urea 790,000 mt/y, and diesel exhaust fluid 315,000 mt/y. “I think at this point NorthAmerica becoming self-sufficient for urea and UAN is guaranteed,” said Green Markets SeniorAnalyst Neil Fleishman.
ARA announces policy priorities for 2016
Washington—TheAgriculturalRetailersAssociation(ARA) on Feb. 2 announced its policy priorities for 2016. Topping thelististheOccupationalSafetyandHealthAdministration’s (OSHA) proposed change to the Process Safety Manage- ment (PSM) retail exemption, which ARA said will deny the exemption to ag retail facilities and push compliance costs to an industry estimated $100 million, or $27,500 per facil- ity. ARA reiterated its position that “Congress must require OSHA to conduct formal rulemaking before implementing any change to the PSM retail exemption.” ARA also targeted EPA’s expanded definition of the Waters of the United States (WOTUS) under the Clean Water Act, saying “Congress must block EPA’s WOTUS regulations,” and amend (Na- tional Pollutant Discharge Elimination System) permitting “to protect applicators from duplicative requirements and legal liability.” ARA said it supports reauthorization of the Water Resources Development Act (WRDA) and a return to two-year budgeting cycles for the WRDA “to ensure Congress provides sufficient resources and oversight of key inland waterway projects,” including construction of new locks on the Mississippi and Illinois Rivers and other inland waterway systems.ARAalso said it supports a federal GMO labeling standard through the Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act, which “would reaffirm the FDA’s role as the authority for food safety and labeling requirements” instead
12Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
of a patchwork of “state and local GMO labeling mandates.” Additionally, ARA said it supports a “pro-growth economic agenda” that includes “workable sales and use tax collection systems that protect retailers and farmers from burdensome tax compliance requirements.” On this front, ARA said it supports comprehensive tax reform, including the STARS ACT, which it said “would reform burdensome and costly provisions in the Affordable Care Act.” ARA’s policy priori- ties also include efforts in energy and technology, saying it supports investments in “biofuel research and production and work with the Coalition to Advance Precision Agriculture and the Rural Broadband Coalition to promote and support industry growth.”
Rentech settling unitholder lawsuits
LosAngeles—RentechNitrogenPartnersLPsaidinSecurities and Exchange Commission filings last week that it is in the process of settling shareholder lawsuits that arose after it was announced CVR Partners LP planned to acquire Rentech’s East Dubuque, Ill., assets (GM Aug. 17, 2015). Unitholders filed class action complaints in both Delaware and Califor- nia. On Feb. 1, Rentech said it entered into Memoranda of Understanding with the plaintiffs. The proposed settlements, which will include Rentech paying plaintiff attorney fees, are contingent on the Rentech-CVR merger becoming effective under Delaware law. In addition, the two companies agreed to make supplemental disclosures to the definitive proxy state- ment. One of those supplements include select financial and production projections for the years 2015-2019, excluding the Pasadena, Texas, assets. Results were impacted in 2016 and 2018 by anticipated turnaround expenses of $5 and $6 million, respectively. Part of that info is listed below:
*Short tons in thousands; EBITDA and operating income in mil- lions; prices in short tons.
Salt still produced at PotashCorp’s Picadilly site
Saskatoon—While it has halted the production of potash at its Picadilly Mine in New Brunswick (GM Jan. 22, p. 1), Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan Inc. will continue to produce salt from the facility for the near term. The Picadilly Mine and its predecessor Penobsquis Mine have served as the major salt sources for the province of New Brunswick. PotashCorp told Green Markets that it will continue to produce the salt in the short term, which will get the province through the
Spring 2016 Fertilizer Outlook:
An Uneasy Start to the Season
Live Interactive Webinar
Wednesday, March 2, 2016
2:00 – 3:30 PM (ET)
After a fall and winter prepay season marked by falling fertilizer prices and delays in spring commitments, this ”from-the-field” market update has never been more important!
Critical questions answered:
•Will low crop prices and reduced farm income lead to significant cutbacks at the farm level?
•Is the fertilizer distribution chain ready for spring fieldwork, or will farmers and dealers continue to delay purchases in the hope of lower in-season prices?
•Is corn king in 2016, or will North American growers steer toward less input-intensive alternatives?
•Will the 2016 planting season open early in the U.S. and Canada, or will delays result in a compressed late-season push?
•How are international exchange rates and currency fluctuations affecting global pricing/supply for fertilizer and grain?
•Are North American distribution channels prepared for a fast-and-furious planting pace?
Speakers include:
•Paul Barr, Director of Procurement,
United Suppliers, Inc.
•Anita LaVelle, Director of Sales,
United Suppliers, Inc.
•Jeremy Goodfellow, Crop Nutrient Procurement
Manager, La Coop fédérée
•Lee Klaskow, Senior Industry Analyst,
Bloomberg Intelligence
Order today at
www.FertilizerPricing.com/SpringOutlook2016
or call 800.531.0140 (+1.603.357.8103).
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
winter. It said that over a six-month period it produces about 300-400,000 mt, which is enough to meet the demand. Pot- ashCorp is under contract with Cargill Inc., which in turn supplies local municipalities.
Ammonia leak reported at Yara Pilbara
Karatha, Western Australia—An ammonia leak at a Yara Pilbara Holdings Ltd. plant here Feb. 2 is under investigation, accordingtothelocalpress,whichreportedthateightcontrac- tors were taken to the hospital. None were reported to have had serious injuries. Yara had not responded at press time.
EuroChem, Agrinos ink specialty fert deal
Zug, Switzerland, and Oslo, Norway—EuroChem Group AG and biological crop nutrition products firm Agrinos AS have signed an equity investment and two strategic collab- oration agreements. The two companies in mid-December reported their intention to enter into multi-year marketing, distribution and sales, research and development (R&D;), and equity investment agreements. Rudolf von Plettenberg, EuroChem’s head of Premium Products & Development, said the deal comes as the Russian fertilizer company seeks to further expand its product portfolio with innovative spe- cialty products and environmentally-friendly crop enhanc- ing solutions. As part of the equity investment agreement, EuroChem will acquire 22,250,000 new shares in Agrinos, with an additional option to acquire up to 32,633,333 new shares over the next 24 months. The private placement is backed byAgrinos’long-term strategic investors and existing shareholders, Manor Investment SA and Havfonn AS, who respectivelywillacquire17,800,000newsharesand4,450,000 newshares.Theproceedswillbeusedtosupporttheexecution of Agrinos’ business plan, which includes focused growth in core geographies and R&D; efforts in second-generation biological crop input products. In addition, the two com- panies have entered two multi-year strategic collaboration agreements. The first collaboration agreement is to market, distribute,andsellAgrinosHighYieldTechnology®(HYT®) products by leveraging EuroChem’s distribution network and market expertise. The second agreement is for the R&D; of new solutions for next generation fertilizer products by inte- grating biological and chemical crop nutrition technologies.
Louis Dreyfus reportedly eyeing partners
Rotterdam—Louis Dreyfus Commodities BV is reported to be looking for strategic partners for its Fertilizers and Inputs business rather than an outright sale, according to Bloomberg. The commodities trader confirmed in early January it was evaluating “all options” for the Fertilizers
&Inputs business, following speculation it was looking to sell the unit (GM Jan. 8, p. 13; Jan. 1, p. 14). The company, which also is reported to be looking for strategic partners for its metals, dairy, and orange juice business lines, is said to be seeking industry partners that could help improve the units rather than financial investors. Bloomberg sources
reported the proposed partnership deals could involve the sale of stakes for cash or shareholding swaps in a move to ring-fence the four business units, some of which already operate separately, from the rest of the company. The commodities trader also is said to have appointed Credit Suisse Group AG to seek options for the Fertilizers and Inputs unit. A spokeswoman for Louis Dreyfus Commodi- ties told Green Markets this week the company’s previous statement still stands (GM Jan. 8, p.13) and it has nothing further to share at this stage. Louis Dreyfus Commodities integrated all of its fertilizer activities under the Macrofertil brand after acquiring DFI, a major distributor of fertilizers and crop protection products based in South Australia, in 2013. Today, the commodities trader offers fertilizers in over 24 countries using local logistics networks (GM Jan. 1, p.14). The move to seek potential partnerships for the four business units – apparently now deemed to be outside the commodities trader’s core business – is seen as part of a strategic plan by the Louis Dreyfus holding company to shore up its finances and reduce investment after a decade or more of rapid growth. Louis Dreyfus Holdings is believed to own 85 percent of Louis Dreyfus Commodities BV.
OCP inaugurates new plant
Morocco—OCP inaugurated a new 1 million mt/y DAP/ MAP plant at its Jorf Phosphate Hub at Jorf Lasfar Feb. 1. The output of the new plant, known as the Africa Fertilizer Complex (AFC), will be targeted entirely for the African market. The Dh5.3 billion ($537 million) plant includes a 1.4 million mt/y sulfuric acid unit and a 450,000 mt/y phosphoric acid unit, as well as 200,000 mt of fertilizer storage capacity. Three more or less identical plants, each with 1 million mt/y of DAP/MAP production capacity, are being developed at the Jorf Phosphate Hub.
Anglo reports lower phosphates output/sales
London—Anglo American plc reported a 3 percent drop in sales volume in 2015 by its phosphates business unit, Anglo American Fosfatos Brasil Ltda. (Copebrás), which is up for sale (GM Jan. 15, p. 13; Oct. 23, 2015). Copebrás sold 1.060 million mt of phosphates last year, down from 1.097 million mt in 2014. All products except “low analysis” fertilizers
–typically SSP – experienced a downturn in sales volume. Sales of low analysis fertilizers grew 1 percent, to 938,100 mt from 927,700 mt in 2014, while sales of high analysis fertil- izers – MAP and TSP – were 6 percent lower at 172,700 mt, down from 184,700 mt. Copebrás produced 1.34 million mt of phosphate concentrate, 5 percent less than 2014’s 1.42 million mt. Output of phosphoric acid was 10 percent lower at 265,100 mt,downfrom295,000mt,anddicalciumphosphateproduction was also 10 percent lower at 147,300 mt. Phosphate fertilizers productionwasmarginallydownat1.111millionmt,compared with 1.113 million mt in 2014.AngloAmerican is targeting the sale of its phosphates and niobium businesses – both based in Brazil – in a single transaction. First-round bids for those assets are reported to be due on Feb. 15.
14Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
Urachem posts higher production
Moscow—Russian nitrogen and phosphates producer Ural- chem JSC increased its total output in 2015 by 4 percent, to 5.894 million mt from 5.645 million mt in 2014. The company achieved a 7 percent increase in the production of urea, to 1.186 million mt, and a 6 percent increase in merchant ammonia output, to 825,000 mt compared with the previous year. But output of ammonium nitrate and its derivatives was largely flat at 2.928 million mt in 2015, against 2.940 million mt the previous year. Production of complex fertilizers increased 18 percent to 617,000 mt, while MAP production was up 150 percent year-on-year, to 104,000 mt from 41,000 mt, reflecting a reduction in unscheduled downtime hours.
Samarco close to deal with Brazilian authorities
Rio de Janeiro & Melbourne—Brazilian iron ore miner Samarco Mineração SA and its joint owners, Vale SA and BHP Billiton Ltd., are expected to reach an agreement this week with Brazilian authorities on a deal to pay damages and costs for Samarco’s tailings dam burst in November, according to media sources quoting Brazil’s Attorney- General Luís Inácio Adams. The deal, which is expected to be finalized later this month, is reported to require Samarco to cover all costs of social and environmental programs, rather than paying the set amount of R$20 billion (US$5 billion) that was originally sought (GM Jan. 29, p.17). As a consequence, the final bill could prove more (or less) expensive for the iron ore miner over the 10 years or more the process is anticipated to take. Vale and BHP would be required to guarantee the financial settlement.
The Andersons launches two new products
Maumee, Ohio—TheAndersons Inc. Plant Nutrient Group plans to launch Foltec SG, a foliar nutrient technology that consists of a propriety combination of dry soluble granules (SG) that quickly solubilize in the spray tank, at the Golf Industry Show Feb. 6-11. The company said Foltec SG is a complete nutrition product that reduces the need for a complex tank mix using a wide variety of products. Foltec SG is available in three formulations and include a high N, high P, and high K formulation. The Plant Group has also launched Crop Coach, a web application that generates product recommendations based on nutrient deficiencies. The online crop strategist allows users to create a custom- ized crop system that maximizes yield and profitability. The company said the application integrates seamlessly with tissue test data from A&L; Great Lakes Labs. Users may also enter plant tissue test nutrient levels from any lab or explore the application manually. It said Crop Coach provides at-a-glance information on the macro and micro- nutrients required for a healthy crop, as well as features, benefits, and physical properties of the company’s line of specialty products. For more information, see www. CropCoach.com.
Study touts fert potential of Wyoming phos rock
Laramie, Wyo.—Officials from the Wyoming State Geologi- cal Survey (WSGS) said recently that Wyoming’s numerous depositsoftherockcouldprovetobeamajorsourceoffertilizer. “Wyomingcouldaddtotheglobalproductionofphosphates,as manyofthestate’shigh-gradeoccurrencesarelocatedrelatively close to existing processing plants in Rock Springs and eastern Idaho,” said Jacob Carnes, a WSGS geologist who authored the 42-page study. Despite being well-known for production of other mineral commodities like trona and bentonite, Wyoming hasn’t had an active phosphate mine for 35 years. In the study, CarnesdescribedtheimportanceoftherockthatWyominghosts in pockets in a central band across most of the state. While it is relativelyabundantthroughoutthestate,Carnesconcludedthat only one area would be likely to draw any commercial interest due to varying problems associated with each major concentra- tion. However, he said that area, the Phosphoria Formation in Teton County in the Snake River Range near Hoback Junction, would likely have its own problems.Acompany with leases to drill for natural gas near the headwaters of the Hoback River eventually had to walk away from the project, as outdoors- men and other activists said they wouldn’t be welcomed. The Trust for Public Land purchased the leases for $8.75 million to prevent the wells that could have been drilled. Still, Carnes said he expected his study to draw interest for new phosphate exploration and resource evaluation.
Zuari Agro buys out Rotem Amfert in fert jv
Gurgaon, India—Zuari Agro Chemicals Ltd. has bought out itspartner,RotemAmfertNegev,intheirjointventurecompany Zuari Rotem Speciality Fertilisers Ltd., which produces water- soluble NPK fertilizers in India’s Maharashtra state for sale throughout India. Zuari Agro is reported to have paid about $2 millionforthe50percentstakeownedbyRotemAmfert,which is a subsidiary of Israel Chemicals Ltd. ZuariAgro reported in a regulatoryfilingthatZuariRotemSpecialityFertilisersbecame a subsidiary of the company effective Dec. 11, 2015. Zuari Agro and Rotem Amfert established the 50:50 joint venture in July 2007 (GM Aug.6, 2007). The plant, which is located in Baramati in Maharashtra state and has a production capacity of 24,000 mt/y, began operations in March 2010 and was the first Indo-Israel collaboration in the Indian fertilizer sector. Zuari Agro is part of the Zuari group of companies owned by the Indian conglomerate Adventz.Group. In November 2015, Zuari Agro signed an MOU with the UAE’s Ras Al Khaimah Maritime City to set up an integrated 1 million mt/y DAP plant in the emirate. The $800 million project includes a power plant, a private jetty, and a desalination plant. The facilities are planned to be built over 400 acres in the free trade zone of Ras Al Khaimah Maritime City.
Zuari Group plans P expansion at MCFL
Mangalore, India—After securing a controlling stake in Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. (MCFL) in May 2015 through its subsidiary Zuari Fertilisers and Chemicals
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
Ltd., the Zuari Group plans to invest Rs3 billion ($44.9 million) to double phosphate production capacity at MCFL. According to local media, Zuari is looking to double phosphate fertilizer production capacity at MCFL’s plant at Panambur, near New Mangalore Port in Karnataka state. MCFL currently has capacity to produce 280,000 mt/y of DAP and NPs. Zuari plans to make the final investment decision in early 2016, according to media reports. MCFL also operates a 380,000 mt/y urea plant at the Panambur site. The Zuari Group acquired an additional 36.56 percent holding in MCFL, making it the majority shareholder, with a 53.03 percent stake. Prior to the purchase, Zuari held a 16.47 percent stake in MCFL.
African Potash inks urea deal with Windmill
Harare, Zimbabwe—U.K. junior potash miner African Potash announced that it has completed a fertilizer trade deal with Zimbabwe-based fertilizer producer Windmill (Pvt) Ltd. Undertheagreement,AfricanPotashdelivered3,000mtofurea to Windmill's warehouse in Harare, Zimbabwe, with African Potash reportedly receiving net revenue of $300,000 from the trade.African Potash said the agreement is significant not only for the near-term revenue it generates for the company, but also fortheimportantadditionalaffiliationitforgesbetweenAfrican Potash and a major player in the company’s target market of southernAfrica. The urea was purchased from Beryl Holdings Pty Ltd., a South African investment firm with whom African Potash signed an agreement to collaborate on fertilizer trading operations in southern and eastern Africa. Under the terms of the deal, Beryl’s main fertilizer trading activities – which include trading, logistics, and financing – will be restructured and operated via a newly formed Mauritian company that will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of African Potash. Beryl’s current share in logistics company Bollore Logistics South Africa is expected to enhance the value of the partnership, with Bollore likely to enter into a trading relationship with the Mauritian company. In August 2015, African Potash reached a trading agreement with the Common Market for Eastern and SouthernAfrica (COMESA) and the MaskAfrica Crowd Farm FundLtd.(MACFF)tocreateaverticalplatformforthemining, production, and distribution of fertilizer, focused on Africa’s eastern and southern COMESAstates region and beyond (GM Aug. 17, 2015). Prior to that, the potash junior had focused on developing its Lake Dinga potash project in the Republic of Congo. African Potash announced late last year that it had bought 8.75 million shares in U.K.-based investment company Blenheim Natural Resources plc, representing 4.74 percent of the share capital of Blenheim.
Rum Jungle inks MOU with Japanese firm
Darwin, Australia—Australian junior resource company Rum Jungle Resources Ltd. has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with a major Japanese trading house for the potential future offtake of sulfate of potash from its portfolio of sulfate of potash projects in the Northern Terri- tory, Western Australia, and South Australia. The identity of
the trading house has not been disclosed, but is described as having a significant Australian presence. Rum Jungle said the two parties would formalize ongoing information flow and engagement regarding the progression of the resource company's potassium brine projects. Depending upon the progression of these projects, the Japanese trading house may consider entering into binding offtake agreements for SOP products from any of Rum Jungle's potassium brine projects. Rum Jungle Managing Director Chris Tziolis said that while the MOU is non-binding and did not represent a commitment at this time, the Japanese firm was considered a preferred offtake partner for distribution of product into certain Asian markets.
Unverferth unveils new liquid fert applicator
Kalida, Ohio—Unverferth Manufacturing Co. Inc. is prom- ising optimum performance from its new NutriMax liquid fertilizer applicator, which Unverferth says helps ensure optimum crop performance through precise placement of nutrients when most needed during periods of high plant growth. According to Unverferth, the NutriMax applicator features a rugged design for high-speed operation and an extra-tall 36” of toolbar crop clearance for a longer ap- plication window. The patent-pending side-folding toolbar also provides a best-in-class narrow transport width of 14’9”. The toolbar is available in sizes of 60’, 66’, 88’, and 90’. The 60’ model folds to 40 feet for dual-width ap- plication. The center frame section is constructed of dual 5”x 7” tubes and a single 6”x 6” tube on the outer wings for enhanced durability.
Scotts buys stake in Bonnie Plants; on track with TruGreen
The Scotts Miracle-Gro Co., Marysville, Ohio, said Feb.
2 that that it has bought a minority stake in Bonnie Plants Inc., Union Springs, Ala., the largest provider in the U.S. of potted vegetables and herbs, sold to gardeners through a variety of retail outlets. Bonnie is owned by privately-held Alabama Farmers Cooperative (AFC), Decatur, Ala.
Scottsboughta25percentstakeinBonnie,accordingtoAFC sources, and Scotts said the deal gives it the ability to increase its ownership over time. In a call with analysts, Scotts said $72 million was associated with the Bonnie transaction, however, it did not return calls for further clarification. Scotts said the acquisition will approach $0.10 earnings per share of accretion nextyearfortheexistingbusiness,notincludingtertiarybenefits thatitbringstoMiracle-GroandotherbrandsthatScottsalready sells. It expects a logical lift in those areas as well.
As part of the agreement, Scotts will also provide Bonnie with exclusive marketing, and research and development services to edible gardening initiatives.
“Our relationship with Bonnie dates back decades when we worked together on marketing programs that helped propel the Miracle-Gro business,” said Jim Hagedorn, Scotts chairman and CEO. “There is no finer brand in the live goods category than Bonnie, and the benefits from this partnership
16Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
for both sides are obvious and significant. We look forward to working with the Bonnie team to drive the gardening category to new heights.”
Hagedorn noted that Scotts has experimented with its own brands in the live goods market on several occasions, but said the company has never been able to build the momentum that it wanted in this growth market. He said the company wanted to be more than just a chemical company. “The growth rate in edible gardening has been in the mid high-single digits over the past five years,” he told analysts. He said it was also “extremely popular with millennials,” and he believed Scotts can further accelerate its growth and popularity.
“As leaders in our respective live goods and consumer prod- ucts categories, our companies have enjoyed a longstanding history together and the Bonnie Plants family welcomes this opportunity to formalize our deep-rooted relationship with ScottsMiracle-Gro,” says Stan Cope, Bonnie Plants president. “Thisinvestmentallowsustoenhanceandgrowourbusinessby combining ScottsMiracle-Gro’s marketing and R&D; expertise with our expertise in plant production through our national greenhouse operations and widespread retail distribution.”
Bonnie Plants will continue to operate as an independent organization, led by Cope. A management committee with representatives from both organizations will oversee any joint business operations. The deal has been approved by the AFC board and is expected to close in late February 2016, provided that certain conditions are met including AFC membership approvals and the restructuring of existing financing.
Bonnie Plants touts that it is the largest and only national supplier and producer of vegetable and herbs in the U.S. It grows more than 250 varieties of vegetable and herb plants for gardeners across the country, with 72 growing stations serving the 48 contiguous states. Established in 1918 by Bonnie and Livingston Paulk, the company is led by Cope, their grandson. Bonnie Plants are available at every Home Depot, Wal-Mart, Lowe’s, and 4,700 independent garden centers in the 48 contiguous states provides their plants in biodegradable, plantable pots.
AFC, founded in 1936, is an agricultural cooperative with 37 member associations, including approximately 90 retail locations and over 2,300 employees.
In other merger and acquisition news, Scotts says its plan to merge its Scotts LawnService business with TruGreen (GM Dec. 14, 2015) is on track to close in the second quarter.
In another product area, Scotts told analysts it is extremely focused on the organic space and is committed to converting the majority of its gardening business to organic, though em- phasizing it would do so without asking gardeners to sacrifice product quality for performance. This will be Scotts’ second full-year with its Nature’s Care organic line in the market- place, and it says it has added sales and promotional support.
Central Garden tanks up on Earth Juice, exits fertilizer private-label contract
Central Garden and Pet,Walnut Creek, Calif., reported a 17 percent increase in sales for its first quarter ending Dec. 26,
New Research from Green Markets®
Agronomist Compensation Survey 2015
Find out if your agronomist pay is at odds with current market rates!
Detailed
compensation data on an increasingly
All new data critical role!
includes:
•2015 Salary and Bonus Data at the US Regional Level
•Salary expectations for 2016
•Tenure’s Impact on Compensation
•Managerial Responsibility’s Impact on Compensation
•Specialization’s Impact on Compensation
•Certification’s Impact on Compensation
•Analysis of benefits and other perks
•And much more!
Agronomist Compensation Survey 2015 is delivered to in PDF format, for only $497.
Order online: www.fertilizerpricing.com/research/ AgCompSurvey2015
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
2015, to $359.8 million from the year-ago $307.3 million, and in doing so revealed that it has added the Earth Juice brand to its portfolio and has exited a fertilizer private-label contract.
Central Garden said the quarter includes three full months of Hydro-Organics, Chico, Calif., which it acquired last year. Hydro-Organics is known for its Earth Juice-branded products. Central Garden provided no further details about the transaction. It did, however, confirm more details about two Pet-related 2015 acquisitions, saying it paid $61 mil- lion for National Consumer Outdoors Corp., a pet bedding company, and $23 million for IMS Trading Corp., a rawhide and pet treat distributor.
The company told analysts Feb. 2 that the private-label fertilizer contract was no longer profitable and was not with a core retailer. It said the private label business remains im- portant to the company and it remains bullish on that segment in general, saying “it gives us more critical mass, a bigger share of the shelf,” and drives manufacturing efficiencies, which benefits its branded business as well.
The company also walked away from its seasonal décor business, i.e., artificial Christmas trees, etc. It said it expects little or no impact on its bottom line from the décor or fertil- izer changes.
As far as where it stands versus ScottsMiracle-Gro, the company told analysts that in the areas where the two com- pete, it is confident that has it held or taken market share in all of those areas. Central Garden recently revealed that for fiscal 2015 some 65 percent of its Garden sales came from three big box stores: Walmart at 31 percent, Lowe’s at 18 percent, and Home Depot at 16 percent. Company-wide, the three represented 31 percent: Walmart 16 percent, Lowe’s eight percent, and Home Depot seven percent.
As for the 17 percent first-quarter uptick in sales, most of that increase was from its Pet segment. Sales were up only three percent, to $111.1 million in Garden, due primarily to stronger grass seed sales as well as higher sales of other manufacturers’ products.
Garden reported a seasonal loss of $3.3 million, improved over the year-ago loss of $3.5 million. Garden’s operating margin improved 40 basis points, more than offsetting a decline in segment gross margin. Grass seed, fertilizers, and other manufacturers’ products were the biggest contributors to the operating margin increase, offset somewhat by lower margins on bird seed.
The company reported a loss of $8.6 million ($.0.18 per share) compared to the year-ago loss of $5.7 million ($0.12 per share).
ChemChina makes $43 B offer for Syngenta; board recommends approval
Syngenta AG announced on Feb. 3 that China National Chemical Corp. (ChemChina) has offered to acquire the company for more than US$43 billion (US$465 per ordinary share). The offer is equivalent to 480 Swiss francs per share based on the Feb. 1 exchange rate, and includes a special dividend to be paid conditionally upon and prior to closing.
Syngenta’s board of directors unanimously recommended the offer to shareholders, saying it believes the proposed transaction “respects the interests of all stakeholders.” Syngenta also reported that there is committed financing for the deal and a strong commitment to pursue regulatory clearances.
A Swiss and U.S. tender offer will commence in the com- ing weeks and the transaction is expected to conclude by the end of the year, subject to regulatory clearance. Syngenta’s existing management will continue to run the company.After closing, a ten member board of directors will be chaired by Ren Jianxin, chairman of ChemChina, and will include four of the existing Syngenta board members.
“In making this offer, ChemChina is recognizing the quality and potential of Syngenta’s business,” said Michel Demaré, chairman of Syngenta. “This includes industry- leading R&D; and manufacturing and the quality of our people worldwide. The transaction minimizes operational disruption; it is focused on growth globally, specifically in China and other emerging markets, and enables long-term investment in innovation.”
Demaré said the company will continue to operate under the Syngenta name and will remain headquartered in Swit- zerland, which he said reflects the country’s “attractiveness as a corporate location.”
Citing several lawyers who deal with security reviews of such transactions, Bloomberg reported that a U.S. national security watchdog is likely to examine whether the deal would compromise American food security, and whether the combined company’s locations would be too close to U.S. military bases.
The deal is the largest-ever acquisition by a Chinese company. ChemChina said it is committed to maintaining the highest governance standards with a view to an IPO of the business in the years to come.
“The discussions between our two companies have been friendly, constructive, and cooperative, and we are delighted that this collaboration has led to the agreement announced today,” said Jianxin. "We will continue to work alongside the management and employees of Syngenta to maintain the company’s leading competitive edge in the global agricultural technology field.”
Bloomberg reported that ChemChina first approached Syngenta last spring, but negotiations stalled as Syngenta fielded and ultimately rejected a number of takeover bids from Monsanto Co. Monsanto’s final offer was submitted in August and valued at $47 billion (GM Sept. 7, 2015), but Syngenta’s board rejected the bid, saying it “significantly undervalued the company and was fraught with execution risk.”
ChemChina reportedly made an offer around US$446 per share (449 Swiss francs) in November, but negotiations between the two companies didn’t move into high gear until December when DuPont and Dow Chemical Co. announced their $66 billion merger (GM Dec. 14, 2015).
“Syngenta is the world leader in crop protection, having significantly increased its global market share over the last ten years,” said John Ramsay, Syngenta CEO. “This deal will
18Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
enable us to maintain and expand this position, while at the same time significantly increasing the potential for our seeds business. It will ensure continuing choice for growers and ongoing R&D; investment across technology platforms and across crops. Our commitment to cost and capital efficiency will remain unchanged.”
Headquartered in Beijing, ChemChina is the largest chemical corporation in China, with production, R&D;, and marketing systems in 150 countries. The company’s main businesses include materials science, life science, high-end manufacturing, and basic chemicals. ChemChina currently ranks 265th on the Fortune 500. The company posted sales of $41.2 billion in 2015, and has 140,000 employees.
Syngenta ranks as the world’s largest pesticide producer and the third-largest global seed business, with total annual sales of $15.1 billion. The company employs some 28,000 people in more than 90 counties.
“Our vision is not confined to our mutual interests, but will also respond to and maximize the interests of farmers and consumers around the world,” said Jianxin. “We look forward to Michel Demaré remaining on the board as vice chairman and lead independent director, and to working with John Ramsay and the management and employees of Syngenta to deliver safe and reliable solutions for the continued growth in global food demand.”
PhosAgro boosts phosphate fert sales
Russian fertilizer producer PhosAgro reported a 12 per- cent increase in sales of phosphate-based fertilizers and monocalcium phosphate (MCP) in 2015, to 5.27 million mt compared with 4.71 million mt in the previous year. Nitrogen-based fertilizer sales were marginally lower (-1.4 percent), falling to 1.37 million mt from 1.38 million mt. Sales of phosphate rock (excluding intra-group sales) fell
18percent year-on-year, to 1.96 million mt from 2.39 million mt in 2014.
Production of phosphate-based fertilizers and feed phos- phates increased 12.2 percent during 2015, to 5.35 million mt, while nitrogen-based fertilizers output was 4 percent higher at 1.43 million mt. Phosphate rock output rose 4.7 percent, to 7.85 million mt last year.
PhosAgro CEO Andrey Guryev said despite 2015 being another challenging year in terms of the macroeconomic environment, the company managed to increase its total fertilizer production by 10.4 percent year-on-year, to 6.79 million mt from 6.15 million mt. The company’s output, he said, had benefited from a steep rouble devaluation at home while selling in U.S. dollars. He added that by the end of 2015 PhosAgro’s annual fertilizer production capacity had reached 7 million mt as a result of continued investment in the modernization of production facilities.
Sales to Europe increased by over 30 percent year-on-year to 1.25 million mt in 2015, and with new trade offices in the region (at Zug, Switzerland, and Warsaw, Poland) now open, Guryev believes the company can achieve even better results this year. The CEO reported the company’s sales to India increased “dramatically” in 2015, reaching 700,000 mt. In
a press interview this week, he said Indian consumption [of fertilizers] was racing ahead thanks to low oil prices, which allow farmers to spend more on fertilizers. He hopes this positive trend will continue in 2016, as well as an improve- ment in Latin American performance, which he described as “weaker” due to low soybean prices and economic challenges facing the region.
Despite a difficult start to the year for Russian farmers, PhosAgro said it had maintained sales volumes to the Russian market at the same level as 2014, with 1.6 million mt supplied to domestic customers in 2015. Guryev is optimistic about the outlook for the domestic market, given that government support has encouraged many farmers to expand production across all agricultural segments.
Guryev thinks the market is nearing the bottom and believes that initiatives like curtailing production will help clear out excess stocks. “This will naturally affect demand ahead of the spring planting season, helping buyers be confident that they can enter a stable fertilizer market without concern that prices may fall further,” he said.
In terms of demand for the spring planting season, PhosA- gro’s portfolio of orders consists primarily of complex fertil- izers that are ready for direct application by end customers and are not blended like DAP or MAP. “We intend to stick to our plan of increasing production capacities for complex fertilizers, which are sold to high-margin markets and will not put pressure on prices for concentrated phosphate fertil- izers,” Guryev said, adding that the company is particularly focused on increasing its sales of complex fertilizers and NPS in its priority domestic and regional markets.
PhosAgro sales volumes
1 Excluding intra-group sales
2 Ammonium polyphosphate solution
Source: PhosAgro
Mosaic, from page 1
Mosaic has recently benefited from drops in ammonia and sulfur prices, but those have not been enough to stave off
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com
declining DAP prices. Sources particularly noted declines at NOLA and Brazil; Mosaic said it will not participate in either at current levels (GM, see p. 7).
The NOLAmarket saw a very slight bump up in pricing last week after the news, with some sources remaining skeptical about the impact (GM, see p. 7), pointing to imports soon to hit the shore. Others suggested that other major producers may have been quietly cutting back as well, and plants in China are expected to run at a bare minimum during next week’s Lunar New Year (GM, see p. 8).
Less DAP being produced also means less ammonia being used, so sources last week gave that as another reason for a sharp drop in NOLA ammonia prices (GM, see p. 2).
CF, CHS, from page 1
and the supply agreement connects us to a reliable partner who will take ratable delivery of product across the year.” “This is an important day for CHS member-owners as we not only complete the single largest investment in our history, butmoreimportantlyestablishlong-termdependablenitrogen fertilizer supply, supply chain efficiency, and opportunity for economic value,” said Carl Casale, CHS president and CEO. “This is a strategic decision about adding value for our member cooperative- and producer-owners on par with the significant investments made in our energy and grains
businesses over our 85 years of operation.”
CHS has purchased a minority equity interest in CF Ni- trogen for $2.8 billion effective Feb. 1, 2016. Through the investment, CHS will be entitled to semi-annual profit dis- tributions from CF Nitrogen based generally on the volume of granular urea and UAN purchased by CHS pursuant to the supply agreement.
Starting Feb. 1, 2016, CHS is entitled to purchase up to
1.1million st of granular urea and 580,000 st of UAN annu- ally from CF Nitrogen for ratable delivery. The 1.7 million product tons available under the supply agreement represent approximately 8.9 percent of CF’s total production capac- ity once its capacity expansion projects are completed at
®
A Bloomberg BNA Business
Customer Service
Email: CustomerService@FertilizerPricing.com
Phone: 800.531.0140 / +1.603.357.8103
Fax: +1.603.357.8111
Web: www.FertilizerPricing.com
Having difficulty downloading your weekly issue of Green Markets? Do you wish to add readers to your subscription? Interested in a company widesite license? Need an ID/PW reminder? Contact Customer Service at the number and email address above.
Headquarters: 24 Railroad Street, Keene, NH 03431-3744 USA, with correspondents in major trading centers worldwide.
Donaldsonville, La., and Port Neal, Iowa, expected in 2016. The two companies marked the start of the strategic rela- tionship with an event for CHS fertilizer customers at CF’s Port Neal Nitrogen Complex. Expectations are that CHS will be supplied from CF facilities at Donaldsonville, Port Neal,
Yazoo City, Miss., and Woodward, Okla.
CHS has said the deal with CF will meet about 46 percent of its annual nitrogen needs (GM Oct. 5, 2015). CHS also opted last year to axe plans to build a $3 billion nitrogen plant in Spiritwood, N.D., and pulled out a urea offtake agreement to buy urea from the proposed Summit Texas Clean Energy Project (GM Sept. 14, 2015).
Pemex, from page 1
are integrated, noting that Pemex can offer financial benefits including the supply of raw materials, strategic infrastructure logistics, and a competitive global market for natural gas.
Pemex said this acquisition confirms its commitment to the domestic agricultural sector, supporting the goals outlined in the National Development Plan and the initiatives of the federal government for the sector, thus increasing the pro- ductivity of the areas sown and improving farmer income in the Mexican countryside.
The company noted that Mexico currently has a supply of fertilizers inaccessible for most of the smaller farmers. It said this acquisition seeks to reconstitute the domestic industry and guide the product towards sectors with lower levels of economic development, located in the south-southeast region, by providing a product of international quality at competitive prices.
Pemex said this new capacity, together with the ammonia capacity of the petrochemical complex Cosoleacaque and production to be obtained in the nitrogen fertilizer plant that is being rehabilitated in Coatzacoalcos (GM Sept. 21, 2015), will allow Pemex fertilizer production to reach almost 3.5 million mt/y with a turnover of about $2 billion, putting the company in the top 15 production companies and distributors of fertilizers in the world.
Information has been obtained by Green Markets from sources believed to be reliable. However, because of the possibility of human or mechanical error by our sources, Green Markets or others, Green Markets does not guarantee the accuracy, adequacy, or completeness of any information and is not responsible for any errors or omissions or for the results obtained from the use of such information.
*By purchasing an individual subscription, you expressly agree not to reproduce or redistribute our content without permission, including by making the content available to non-subscribers within your company or elsewhere. For multi-user and firm-wide distribution programs or for copyright permission to republish ar- ticles, please contact our licensing department at +1.603.357.8160 or by email at: jping@green-markets.com.
Notice: It is a violation of federal copyright law to reproduce all or part of this publication or its contents by any means. The Copyright Act imposes liability of up to $150,000 per issue for such infringement. Information concerning illicit duplication will be gratefully received. To ensure compliance with all copyright regulations or to acquire a license for multi-subscriber distribution within a company or for permission to republish, please contact Green Markets corporate licensing department at +1.603.357.8160, or e-mail jping@green-markets.com. Reporting on commercial products herein is to inform readers only and does not constitute an endorsement. Green Markets (ISSN 0149-5569) is published by Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business, 24 Railroad Street, Keene NH 03431-3744 USA. Tel: 800.531.0140 / +1.603.357.8103. Fax: +1.603.357.8111.
Base subscription rates: If you are interested in subscribing to Green Markets, call 800.531.0140 / +1.603.357.8103. Green Markets is published Mondays, 51 weeks a year. ISSN 0149-5569.
Historical Database: Green Markets price statistics, going back as far as 1977, are available for purchase. For more information, contact Jonathan Wentworth-Ping at +1.603.357.8160 or e-mail jping@green-markets.com.
Reprints: Articles appearing in Green Markets can be reprinted on stock paper in specified quantities. Contact Jonathan Wentworth-Ping at +1.603.357.8160, or e-mail jping@green-markets.com.
20Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction Prohibited by Law.
www.FertilizerPricing.com



Urea (g)  |  187-205  |  
Urea (p)  |  225  |  
DAP  |  312-325  |  



   |     |     |     |     |     |  Ammonia  |     |     |     |     |     |  
1000  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Cornbelt  |     |  Eastern Canada  |     |  Tampa  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
800  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
600  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
400  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
200  |     |     |     |  11-2-15  |  11-9-15  |  11-16-15 11-23-15  |  11-30-15 12-7-15  |     |     |  1-1-16  |  1-8-16 1-15-16 1-22-16  |     |  2-5-16  |  
10-5-15  |  10-12-15  |  10-19-15  |  10-26-15  |  12-14-15  |  12-21-15  |  1-29-16  |  



300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  UREA  |     |  UAN st  |     |  AMMONIUM NITRATE  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
250  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
150  |     |     |     |  11-2-15  |  11-9-15  |  11-16-15  |  11-23-15  |  11-30-15  |  12-7-15  |  12-14-15  |  12-21-15 1-1-16  |  1-8-16  |  1-15-16 1-22-16 1-29-16 2-5-16  |  
10-5-15  |  10-12-15  |  10-19-15  |  10-26-15  |  



Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business  |  3  |  



AMMONIA  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
Tampa CFR mt  |  310  |  495  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA CFR mt  |  315  |  500  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA  |  261-271  |  565  |  
Cornbelt  |  360-425  |  580-635  |  
Northern Plains  |  425-455  |  600-620  |  
Northern Plains DEL  |  460-485  |  615  |  
Great Lakes  |  420-430  |  625-635  |  
South Central  |  380-420  |  590-610  |  
Southern Plains  |  280-340  |  530-570  |  
California DEL  |  570  |  710  |  
Pacific Northwest DEL  |  495-525  |  650-675  |  
Eastern Canada  |  675-705  |  830-835  |  
Western Canada DEL  |  730-740  |  981-1086  |  
Black Sea  |  250-260  |  390-400  |  
Caribbean  |  260-270  |  445-455  |  
Middle East  |  270-275  |  420-450  |  
Western Europe CFR  |  310-320  |  450-460  |  



AQUA AMMONIA  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
California  |  157  |  193  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  132  |  172-175  |  
   |     |     |  
UREA  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA  |  187-205  |  315-319  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA import prill  |  225  |  315-322  |  
Cornbelt  |  235-255  |  365-385  |  
Northern Plains  |  240-245  |  370-430  |  
Northern Plains DEL  |  290  |  435-450  |  
Great Lakes  |  255-275  |  380-415  |  
Northeast  |  245-255  |  375-385  |  
Southeast  |  275-280  |  375-380  |  
South Central  |  235-255  |  360-365  |  
Southern Plains  |  245-250  |  360-365  |  
California  |  310-320  |  400-405  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  325-335  |  395-400  |  
Pacific Northwest DEL  |  328-340  |  435-442  |  
Eastern Canada  |  470-485  |  525-540  |  
Western Canada DEL  |  495-500  |  625-645  |  
Black Sea prill  |  182-183  |  300-310  |  
Indonesia bulk  |  210-220  |  NA  |  
Middle East granular  |  185-195  |  370-375  |  
Middle East prill  |  185-195  |  360-365  |  
   |     |     |  
UAN  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA st  |  155-160  |  260-265  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA  |  4.84-5.00  |  8.13-8.28  |  
Cornbelt  |  6.25-7.19  |  9.53-10.00  |  
Northern Plains  |  7.07  |  10.07-10.89  |  
Northern Plains DEL  |  7.68-7.86  |  NA  |  
Great Lakes  |  7.05-7.50  |  9.82-10.54  |  
Northeast  |  5.31-7.34  |  8.91-10.50  |  



UAN  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
Southeast  |  5.41-5.56  |  8.75-8.91  |  
South Central  |  6.25-6.56  |  9.06-9.53  |  
Southern Plains  |  6.09-6.56  |  8.75-9.53  |  
California  |  7.34-7.81  |  9.53-10.00  |  
Pacific Northwest DEL  |  8.34-8.75  |  11.09-11.41  |  
Eastern Canada  |  11.25-11.36  |  12.00-12.14  |  
Western Canada DEL  |  11.43-11.76  |  15.25-15.82  |  



AMMONIUM NITRATE  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA  |  200-215  |  300-302  |  
Cornbelt  |  275-280  |  360  |  
Southeast  |  295-300  |  355-360  |  
South Central  |  250-255  |  350  |  
Southern Plains  |  255-260  |  345-350  |  
Eastern Canada  |  460-555  |  482-550  |  



CAN-17  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
California  |  303-325  |  332-352  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  300  |  300  |  
   |     |     |  
AN-20  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
California DEL  |  310  |  300  |  
   |     |  
AMMONIUM SULFATE 2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
Cornbelt  |  265-280  |  285-325  |  
Northern Plains  |  255-260  |  300-310  |  
Northern Plains DEL  |  275-295  |  320-330  |  
Great Lakes  |  280-295  |  315-325  |  
Northeast DEL  |  290-300  |  305-315  |  
Southeast  |  270-280  |  265-275  |  
Southeast DEL  |  290-305  |  270-295  |  
South Central  |  245-260  |  275-285  |  
Southern Plains  |  240-275  |  260-295  |  
California  |  270-325  |  270-325  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  285-295  |  290-340  |  
Pacific Northwest DEL  |  292-302  |  300-345  |  
Eastern Canada  |  480-495  |  410-435  |  
Western Canada DEL  |  400-410  |  525-545  |  
   |     |     |  
AMTHIO  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
Cornbelt  |  295-335  |  310-350  |  
Great Lakes  |  325-335  |  350-360  |  
South Central  |  295-305  |  310-325  |  
Southern Plains  |  295-300  |  295-300  |  
California  |  275-300  |  300  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  300-320  |  310-320  |  
   |     |     |  
DAP  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
Central Florida  |  360-370  |  435-445  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA  |  312-325  |  440-447  |  
U.S. Gulf export mt  |  380-385  |  485  |  



DAP  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
Cornbelt  |  355-370  |  470-490  |  
Northern Plains  |  365  |  480  |  
Great Lakes  |  365-385  |  480-500  |  
Northeast  |  380-385  |  485-500  |  
South Central  |  360-375  |  475-480  |  
Southern Plains  |  350-360  |  475-480  |  



MAP  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
Central Florida  |  370-380  |  455-465  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA  |  315-328  |  445-448  |  
Cornbelt  |  360-375  |  485-510  |  
Northern Plains  |  370-395  |  490-535  |  
Great Lakes  |  375-395  |  500-520  |  
Northeast  |  380-390  |  500-515  |  
Southern Plains  |  350-360  |  480-490  |  
California DEL  |  475-510  |  580-590  |  
Pacific Northwest DEL  |  465-490  |  580-585  |  
Eastern Canada  |  672-675  |  665-670  |  
Western Canada DEL  |  755-770  |  810-845  |  



TSP  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA import  |  290  |  380-385  |  
South Central  |  335-355  |  410-420  |  
   |     |     |  
10-34-0  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
Cornbelt  |  475-515  |  530-550  |  
Northern Plains  |  495  |  540  |  
Northern Plains DEL  |  495  |  550-560  |  
Great Lakes  |  510-515  |  540-550  |  
Northeast  |  510-520  |  530  |  
Southern Plains  |  475-495  |  540-550  |  
California  |  484-489  |  534-539  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  461-476  |  510-520  |  
   |     |     |  
11-37-0  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
California  |  525-530  |  587-592  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  502-517  |  562  |  
   |     |     |  
16-20-0  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
California  |  408-415  |  418-425  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  NA  |  432-437  |  
Pacific Northwest DEL  |  390  |  432-437  |  
   |     |     |  
PHOS. ACID  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
California  |  10.85  |  11.45  |  
California DEL  |  10.65-10.70  |  11.25  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  10.15  |  10.75  |  
Pacific Northwest DEL  |  10.60-10.65  |  11.25  |  
India CFR  |  715  |  765  |  



PHOS. ROCK  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
North Africa  |  97-132  |  117-129  |  
   |     |     |  
POTASH  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA  |  198-205  |  355-360  |  
Cornbelt  |  240-260  |  400-417  |  
Northern Plains  |  260-265  |  400-417  |  
Northern Plains DEL  |  250-260  |  Not found  |  
Great Lakes  |  260-270  |  410-417  |  
Northeast DEL  |  270-280  |  417-427  |  
Southeast DEL  |  270-275  |  410-418  |  
South Central  |  260-275  |  405-410  |  
Southern Plains  |  255-260  |  400-405  |  
California  |  425-430  |  518-535  |  
California DEL  |  430-440  |  525-535  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  368-376  |  461-475  |  
Pacific Northwest DEL  |  372-380  |  480-495  |  
Eastern Canada  |  435-445  |  505-525  |  
Western Canada  |  450-460  |  470-480  |  
Western Canada (mine)  |  425-430  |  445-450  |  
Carlsbad standard  |  260  |  405-410  |  
Carlsbad granular  |  260-267  |  410-417  |  
Carlsbad soluble  |  267  |  417  |  
Saskatchewan standard st  |  210-215  |  365  |  
Saskatchewan granular st  |  215-220  |  370  |  
Saskatchewan soluble st  |  220-225  |  377  |  
Vancouver granular mt  |  311-320  |  290-297  |  
Vancouver standard mt  |  298-305  |  277-282  |  
   |     |  
POTASSIUM SULFATE 2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
California  |  682-695  |  722-735  |  
Eastern Canada  |  901-905  |  946-980  |  
   |     |  
POTASSIUM NITRATE 2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
California  |  950-1020  |  950-1020  |  
   |     |     |  
SOP MAGNESIA  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
Pacific Northwest  |  443-463  |  481  |  
Eastern Canada  |  670-715  |  574-650  |  
   |     |     |  
SULFUR  |  2/5/2016  |  Year Ago  |  
Tampa c lt  |  95  |  147  |  
Houston DEL c lt  |  80  |  132  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA c lt  |  84  |  136  |  
U.S. Gulf NOLA prill mt  |  90  |  160-165  |  
West Coast mt  |  80-100  |  160-165  |  
Alberta mt  |  (-)12-60  |  (-)10-75  |  
Vancouver c mt  |  85-105  |  165-175  |  
Vancouver s mt  |  85-105  |  165-175  |  



Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business  |  5  |  



   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Cornbelt  |     |     |     |     |     |  
500  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  UREA  |     |  DAP  |     |  POTASH  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
400  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
200  |     |     |     |  11-2-15  |  11-9-15  |  11-16-15  |  11-23-15 11-30-15 12-7-15 12-14-15  |  12-21-15 1-1-16  |  1-8-16  |     |     |  1-29-16 2-5-16  |  
10-5-15  |  10-12-15  |  10-19-15  |  10-26-15  |  1-15-16  |  1-22-16  |  



300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  China Granular  |     |  China Prill  |     |  India CFR  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
250  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
200  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
150  |     |     |     |  11-2-15  |  11-9-15  |  11-16-15  |  11-23-15  |  11-30-15  |  12-7-15 12-14-15 12-21-15  |  1-1-16  |  1-8-16 1-15-16  |  1-22-16  |     |  
10-5-15  |  10-12-15  |  10-19-15  |  10-26-15  |  1-29-16 2-5-16  |  



Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business  |  7  |  



500  |     |  Central Florida  |     |  New Orleans barge  |     |  U.S. Gulf Export  |  
   |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  



400  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
300  |     |     |     |  11-2-15  |  11-9-15  |  11-16-15  |  11-23-15 11-30-15 12-7-15  |  12-14-15  |  12-21-15  |  1-1-16  |  1-8-16  |  1-15-16  |  1-22-16  |     |     |  
10-5-15  |  10-12-15  |  10-19-15  |  10-26-15  |  1-29-16  |  2-5-16  |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |     |  Potash  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  



400  |     |  Carlsbad mine  |     |  New Orleans barge  |     |  Saskatchewan mine  |  
   |     |     |  
   |     |     |     |     |     |  



300  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |  
200  |     |     |     |  11-2-15  |  11-9-15  |  11-16-15  |  11-23-15  |  11-30-15  |  12-7-15  |  12-14-15  |  12-21-15  |  1-1-16  |  1-8-16  |  1-15-16  |  1-22-16  |     |     |  
10-5-15  |  10-12-15  |  10-19-15  |  10-26-15  |  1-29-16  |  2-5-16  |  



Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business  |  9  |  



Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business  |  11  |  



   |  2015  |  2016  |  2017  |  2018  |  2019  |  
Production  |     |     |     |     |     |  
UAN st  |  775  |  753  |  848  |  789  |  850  |  
Amm st  |  921  |  911  |  1,058  |  984  |  1,060  |  
Amm/sale  |  561  |  477  |  571  |  531  |  572  |  
EBITDA  |  109.6  |  88.1  |  111.2  |  92.0  |  123.6  |  
Oper. Inc.  |  91.3  |  70.3  |  93.1  |  73.5  |  104.7  |  
Prices  |     |     |     |     |     |  
UAN  |  255  |  246  |  255  |  257  |  273  |  
Amm.  |  542  |  516  |  513  |  512  |  553  |  



Green Markets®  |  WEBINAR  |  
A Bloomberg BNA Business  |     |  
   |     |  



Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business  |  13  |  



Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business  |  15  |  



Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business  |  17  |  



‘000 mt  |  2015  |  2014  |  Y-on-y  |  
   |     |     |  change  |  
   |     |     |  (%)  |  
Phosphate rock1  |  1,962.4  |  2,392.4  |  -18.0  |  
Phosphate-based fertilizers  |     |     |     |  
and MCP  |     |     |     |  
Of which:  |     |     |     |  
DAP/MAP  |  2,639.2  |  2,364.1  |  +11.6  |  
NPK  |  1,878.5  |  1,680.4  |  +11.8  |  
NPS  |  265.3  |  250.0  |  +6.1  |  
APP2  |  104.5  |  89.9  |  +16.2  |  
PKS  |  89.8  |  45.5  |  +97.4  |  
Nitrogen-based fertilizers  |     |     |     |  
Of which:  |     |     |     |  
Urea  |  949.4  |  1,016.6  |  -6.6  |  
AN  |  416.0  |  247.6  |  +68.0  |  



Green Markets® February 5 © 2016 Kennedy Information, LLC, A Bloomberg BNA Business  |  19  |  



Steve Seay, Associate Publisher.......................  |  +1.603.357.8245 (sseay@green-markets.com)  |  
Daniel Cole, Senior Editor, North America....  |  +1.603.357.8218 (dcole@green-markets.com)  |  
Dan Kubiske, Senior Correspondent, International  |  .......................................+1.703.678.6833  |  
   |     |  (dkubiske@green-markets.com)  |  
Ryan Boyle, Correspondent, Phosphates/Sulfur..............................................  |  +1.415.967.3693  |  
   |     |  (rpboyle@gmail.com)  |  
Jason Larareo, Associate Creative Director...........................  |  (jlarareo@green-markets.com)  |  
Daniel Houder, President & Publisher..................................  |  (dhouder@green-markets.com)  |  



